
>Where do we go from here? Towards theatre. That art more than music resembles nature. We have eyes as well as ears, and it is our business while we are alive to use them.

>	John Cage

## A garden of music and social connections

Ryoan-ji is a fifteen-century Zen-style garden in Kyoto, Japan. It is a 248-square-meter rectangular plane of gravel raked carefully every day by the monks, to resemble water, and it has fifteen rough stones placed upon it, grouped in different sized formations. It was made as a place for meditation. It is beautiful, it is calm, and it is somewhat mysterious: a place that, in his later years, came to mean a lot to John Cage, both for his practice as a visual artist and as composer. In the same way that Cage turned to, and used, Asian philosophy when carving out his very own esthetic stance, he used Ryoan-ji as a musical compositional device. To claim any relation between Asian music and Cage’s compositions is highly contentious. Instead it is important to understand that “his borrowings were not so much faithful transcriptions of ideas as they were carefully constructed intellectual subversions” (Patterson 1996, 51).<sup>110</sup><div class="footnote"><sup>110</sup> For an in-depth view on Cage’s relation to Asian philosophy, art and thinking see Patterson 2011.</div>   Cage made a series of drawings and dry points based on the structural components of the garden, and a series of musical compositions with different instrumentation, all with the title *Ryoanji*. Over the years, when listening to his music, this composition in particular made a strong impression on me. It kind of sunk into my body and reverberated there even when I was not listening to it. I was struck by how, within its confined structure, it managed to maintain a sense of unpredictability and I was also taken by how it radiated vitality despite a sense of darkness. I came to see it as a composition that made manifest how Cage “spent the last fifty years of his life approaching calmness.” (Lewallen in Bernstein and Hatch, 2001, 234) But this calmness was not about abandoning complexity, or friction, or unpredictability, but rather about how it created a world of its own, and that understanding was important for my experience. So, even though the performance of *Ryoani – A Meeting*, both in its conceptualization and now in these research reflections, was/is thought of as a staged investigation of sorts, it grows out of an unshielded emotional reaction, a bodily impulse, to the music. (LINK: to a recording of the music) Kom ihåg!

When this intuitive and almost physical reaction to the music commingled with my thinking around the concepts of anarchic harmony (Cage), relation of non-relation/connection through non-connection (Massumi), immanence and multiplicity (Deleuze), and inter-subjectivity (Braidotti) and with Cage’s own descriptions of his thoughts behind the relationship between the Ryoan-ji garden and his compositional thinking, I became completely intrigued by the idea of making a performance piece with the musical composition *Ryoanji* as the time-space in which human subjects moved and danced.<sup>111</sup><div class="footnote"><sup>111</sup> The names of referential voices mentioned here are just indicative of my own personal process/reading/thinking and of course not meant to assert some kind of origin of the concepts/phenomena that they are attached to.</div> I started to imagine how it could be performatively made into a world in which meetings could take place. Initially, the idea held investigative questions about how human relations are formed, sustained, dissolved and reshaped, and when I look at my early notes I find formulations like “processes of socialization”, “transformation, movement, change” and also questions that evolve around theories on inter-subjectivity. And one question that reoccurs is: “To be alone together – how?” (Petri, private notebook, 120110).

That is how a musical experience and some unstructured thoughts fused to become the seeds from which the performance of *Ryoanji – A Meeting* came to grow, and which this text is going to be about. In comparison to the other two descriptive texts, the critical borders will be drawn by focusing on the conceptual, methodological and directorial thinking, and this mainly on a theoretical level. The actual collective creative process is not discussed. Instead, it is the correlation between compositional choices and their presumed impact on the collective process – as well as on the audience – that will be looked at. An exception from this descriptive approach, which is an exception caused by the importance of the music in the performance, is the inclusion of thoughts and reflections by the two musicians, Ivo Nilsson and Jonny Axelsson, which creates contact with the corporeality of the performance. In line with that, I will critically weigh my own telling against the experience of looking at the documentations. They do not come close to offering an experience like the one of being in the space during the performance, but they can function as a reactivation of the initial ideas, and as a base for a discussion on the expressive impact.

The performance of *Ryoanji – A Meeting* is a project that is open and rich and at the same time problematic, stable but at the same time very unstable. It is a project that on a conceptual level has clarity, but at the same time it is, both in its collective creative process and in the process of perception, quite blurry. These contradictions clearly expose what is at stake in a collaborative creative situation based on an immanent creative process: They show that there is risk-taking involved when setting in motion creative processes that build on open structures and investigative intentions. This in turn, underscores that the risk-taking is absolutely necessary and desirable, for a number of reasons: It is a precondition for a process that aims to be truly investigative; it makes apparent my attempt to provoke myself into creative situations where my directorial impact is limited, thus disconnecting the work from my own subjectivity; it contains the possibility to experience something I have not anticipated; and it asserts that there is a direct link between the level of risk-taking and the possibility of an immanent process happening, in the making and sharing of the performance. In other words, there is an unavoidable connection between the fragility of the performance and the possibility for co-composition. Therefore these contradictions must be seen as a substrate for the reasoning.  In the most concentrated way they encapsulate the potential to ask, investigate and research, what really is behind setting it all in motion.

# The composition

To briefly look at how Cage composed *Ryoanji*, the structural specifics, is interesting mainly because of how its components and compositional choices inspired, and in some cases even were directly transferred into the performance. The composition exists in different versions where a limited number of structural components are placed into varying instrumentations. There are two, what Cage calls “accompanying parts”, to be played either by solo percussion or by a small orchestra with about twenty-four players. The instrumentation for the percussion part is not exactly defined but in the score Cage states that it should be “At least two only slightly resonant instruments of different material (wood and metal, not metal and metal) played in unison” (Cage 1983, 1). When this accompanying structure (see picture of score below) is transferred to the orchestra the musicians should “play any pitches, or make any sounds that they choose, but they make always the same sound, as though they have become percussion instruments” (Retallack 1996, 240). In our performance the percussionist Jonny Axelsson chose to play the part on wood and stone, in other words, on an instrument not suggested by Cage. Axelsson chose stone because of the timbre and when commenting on altering the instrumentation he says “it’s hard for me to believe that he [Cage] would think it’s a deviation from his intention. If I am really honest I don’t think he thought of the possibility, playing the part on stones. He just didn’t think of stones as a part of a percussion players set up” (Nilsson/Axelsson, Interview 1 at 59:28).

 kom ihåg bild
Bar 1 to 23 of accompanying part

As we can see from the score the accompanying part has an even metric construct with either one single quarter note, or groups of two and three (there are actually only two groups of three in the whole score). Throughout the score these groupings are separated by quarter rests, from one up to six beats, with no rhythmical subdivisions. Neither are there any repeated patterns, except when the full score is repeated.<sup>112</sup><div class="footnote"><sup>112</sup> The score is 77 bars with the time signature varying from 12 to 15 beats, and one repeat of the full length is indicated.</div>  The lack of rhythmical subdivisions and the very limited variation in groupings generates, at first, a sense that it is a sequence of a repetitive construct. Though, there is no repeated sequence, it is continuously varying, which in turn contributes to the experience of unpredictability. The perceptive outcome can thus be said to be both steady *and* somewhat unbalanced. This ambivalent quality is also present in the instruction Cage gives regarding the dynamics, when he says that they “should be played quietly but not as background. They should even be imperceptibly in the foreground. They should have some life (slight changes of imperceptible dynamics) as though the light on them is changing” (Cage, 1983, 1).<sup>113</sup><div class="footnote"><sup>113</sup> When percussionist Jonny Axelsson is asked how he understands the contradictory instruction - *imperceptibly in the foreground* – he says that he sees it as an indication/instruction for articulation for when “it is played with a very clear articulation it can be played very softly but still be experienced as lucid, as ‘close’ to the listener, and not as something blurry in the background. Yes, I would say it’s an articulation instruction. You see, if the instruction was that it should be played with a clear articulation, its very easy to play too loud, because then it becomes clear, right.” (Nilsson/Axelsson, Interview 1, 53:25).</div>

One of the accompanying parts – the solo percussion version or the one for small orchestra – should be performed together with a solo part, of which there are five, specifically written for flute, voice, oboe, double bass and trombone. The version played in the performance was the one for trombone. It seems, from Cage’s own explanation of how he came to start composing *Ryoanji* that the composition actually grew from an idea about the solo part. He explains how it began with an oboist who asked him to write a piece especially for him, and after listening to the oboe, hearing it slide, Cage reflected “it could be a sliding sound, and what could bring that sliding sound about would be the perimeter of a stone. And in the garden in Kyoto called Ryoanji there are fifteen stones.” (Retallack 1996, 242). It is these fifteen stones then that Cage elaborates on in the making of the piece, by moving them into the “garden” of the score, which is represented by a stave, each page having two staves, each spread four staves, and the staves “are actually the area of the garden” (Retallack 1996, 240).<sup>114</sup><div class="footnote"><sup>114</sup> It is a bit confusing whether Cage sees each stave as “a garden” or each two pages, a spread, as representing the garden, because contrary to this statement he says in the forward to the solo part that “Each two pages are a ‘garden’ of sounds” (Cage, 1983b, 1).</div>  


 Kom ihåg bild!
First stave of the first page in the solo trombone part

Musician Ivo Nilsson, on reading the score says: “For me the score itself is a space. I think of it as a volume, almost like a cube. And with that I mean that all the parameters move in depth as well as in pitch. You know, you can experience some music as if it moves to ‘the right’, that it has a direction. That’s not at all the case here, here you move in all directions. There is no path to follow. Every two pages is a garden, that’s my inner picture, and then when you turn the page you move into another garden, which is very much the same, but it has different dimensions” (Nilsson/Axelsson 2015, 1:06:15). This three dimensional inner image that Ivo Nilsson refers to, as constantly present when playing, has an interesting extension that more directly relates to the performance situation when he says that “sure, it’s possible to say that the sliding sound is a concrete transference of the stones perimeter, but I don’t think that it necessarily has to be a stone, but more a volume, a space in the air, and what’s special when we do it now, with dancers, is that the stone could be a dancer, a body.” (Nilsson/Axelsson 2015, 1.13.40)

Cage indicates in the foreword to the solo part, the possibility to include more than one solo instrument in a performance. He says that when “there are two or more parts active at the same time their relationship in time need not be exactly the one delineated. Each part should be played or recorded independently of the others but within the same total length of time and following the general outlines of proportional notation.” (Cage 1983b, 1) Through a specific sound design set-up, this is also how the music in *Ryoanji – A Meeting* was performed, prerecorded versions of percussion and trombone were included (also played by Nilsson/ Axelsson) that extended the depth of the soundscape as well as increased the complexity of how the trombone moved through “the garden”.<sup>115</sup><div class="footnote"><sup>115</sup> Sound designer Niklas Billström describes this process/work: “Ivo Nilsson and Jonny Axelsson had previously recorded a number of percussion and trombone parts. I built a ‘player’ in the program Pure Data in which I could activate the different parts separate from each other, kind of like a keyboard and each part could then be placed and moved around in the space independently. The parts could also be played kind of fragmented. The live instruments were also amplified so that they could be merged with the prerecorded material.” (Billström, Interview 150930)</div>   

The duration of the piece is, like very often in Cage’s compositions where many  parameters are left open for the performer to decide, a parameter that is relatively fixed. However, that is an observation that is rather dubious, since it applies only to the solo part and, more specifically, to the solo part *in parts*, which theoretically makes the duration of the piece as a whole, quite uncertain. In the foreword Cage says that each two pages, a spread, should take two minutes. But he also says that the “Percussion piece begins and ends a performance, in each case with about two measures. It continues during silences of any length between voice (trombone) pieces” (Cage, 1983b, 1). A piece should here be understood as the spread of two pages (two minutes times eight), but then between these “pieces” there can be “silences of any length”.<sup>116</sup><div class="footnote"><sup>116</sup> The different version have different lenght. The version for trombone is two minutes times eight, but the version for solo voice is two minutes times six.</div> Cage is quite vague when he says that the percussion should start and end with “about two measures”, and that there can be pauses in the solo part of any duration, decided by the performer.<sup>117</sup><div class="footnote"><sup>117</sup> It is worth noting the very interesting choice Cage makes when formulating this instruction, by using the word silence. Why and how does he see the sound of the percussion as part of the silence, and what does that mean? Does it indicate that the sound of the percussion (being “imperceptible in the foreground”) should be heard as some kind of ongoing audible event, in the world as a whole? And also, how does this formulation relate to his well known composition *4’33*, which originally had the title *Silent Prayer?* </div> This leaves us with a more or less undefined duration of the composition as a whole.

 kom ihåg - skit i bilden

Various components, methods and ideas from the Cage composition were transferred into the conceptualization of the performance, and influenced how it was prepared and how the material was formed. Most importantly – and in my eyes unavoidable – the overall atmosphere of the performance had to be closely related to the type of sensitivity that I experienced from listening to the music. But also, it was important that it stay true to Cage’s insistent instruction of soft dynamics and to the notion that the sound (movement, activity) should be “as much as possible like sound events in nature rather than sounds in music” (Cage, 1983b, 1). I imagined that these aspects had to be carefully nourished in order to create a “space-time” with a specific temperature in which the meetings happening within the performance situation (expressive and social) would take place.

The fact that the composition is used as a base, and frame, for a dance performance is a concrete interpretation of Cage’s formulation that the “score is a ‘still’ picture of mobile circumstances” (Cage 1983b, 1). But looking at other compositional aspects that were important and integrated into the space-time composition of the performance, I want to first make mention of Cage’s idea that (musical) movements should move (“be played”) independently of each other.<sup>118</sup><div class="footnote"><sup>118</sup> Cage’s formulation in the foreword is: ”where there are two or more parts active at the same time their relationship in time need not be exactly the one delineated. Each part should be played or recorded independently of the others but within the same total length of time and following the general outlines of proportional notation” (Cage, 1983b, 1).</div> This became the approach not only for the collective movement – the starting point for the performer activity would be the individual initiative – but it also steered the creative method so that all material that was produced ensued from individual choices, made by the performer. A second structural component that was appropriated, mirroring the solo part (trombone), was the idea of letting the performer movements start and stop, taking long pauses, resting in stillness; a structure that holds the potential of experiencing the movement as continuing through the stillness (the sound of the trombone is there even if the musician does not play).  Related to that on-going-ness was my decision to extend Cage’s instruction so that the percussion part would start and end the composition (with “about two measures”) allowing for a much longer sequence of solo percussion, both in the beginning of the performance and at the end. If the decision by percussionist Jonny Axelsson to use stones as one instrument in the instrumental set-up, can be said to pull in the garden more concretely, into the sound of the music, that idea was then taken one step further when, at one point in the performance, all the performers were directed to play the percussion part using stones.

When this understanding of the characteristics of the composition merged with the notion that the percussion part could possibly be part of a “silence,” it created in me a picture that the performance, as a whole, should be representative of an ongoing movement that is there but not sensed until experienced. A further impact of the specific quality of the music was that its timbre, rhythm and way of structuring time created a sense of a world all its own. I imagined this quality would enable the audience – and the performers – to experience all the seemingly disconnected expressions moving through the space, as connected.<sup>119</sup><div class="footnote"><sup>119</sup> Commenting on the nature of the “world” that the composition conjures up, musician Jonny Axelsson relates it to the limitations of the material, saying: “The music consists of such a limited material,, and this I think, effaces a traditional kind of narration. You know, if the material is of a more contrasting type, then you get a story of sorts, but with this very limited material you don’t. … As a musician in a performance like this you are very aware of what kind of space that will ensue when you start playing” (Jonny Axelsson, Interview 1, 3.45). </div> Which I, in turn, saw as harboring the potential of redirecting affirmation away from the singular to the collective, to pull the individual subject into a larger social movement.

## Problematizing choreography

I don’t regard what I did when working with the dancers Anna Pehrsson, Love Källman, Pontus Pettersson and Tove Brunberg, as making choreography. The end result can certainly be talked about as a choreographic presentation but my work with the dancers should rather be described as a conceptualized process in which I instilled different materials – instructions for improvisations, performative tasks, a relational framework – to be used for investigating and developing individual bodily expressions. This stance/methodology did not stem entirely from the fact that I have no expertise in forming choreographic material on a detailed level, but instead grew from the unavoidable outcome of the decision to work with immanent processes in which the individual performer’s creativity/responsibility is the source of the expression. However, when conceptualizing the working process, I decided to create and present suggestions for actions and ways of thinking that would function as starting points from which the improvisations could grow. My approach was therefore not about suggesting specific movements, but to suggest different ways of creating them. I also thought that my suggestions, in their totality, should somehow indicate a type of sensitivity and focus that the performer could search for from within, and which would create, as I envisioned it, a specific energy and atmosphere. I foresaw that this would become a process in itself, meaning that whatever suggestion I would make could be reformulated and revised, by the individual.

I formulated a series of instructions/suggestions that were placed in 10 different groups: Body and Time, The Concrete, Impossibilities, Changes, Inner Movements, To Think, To Feel, The World Outside, Positions (in the space, in the garden), Tableaus.

* *Body and Time*
* The movement I think was my very first.
* Make a movement that’s in your family.
* Make a movement that you by habit did before but not any more.
* The movement you imagine will be your last.
* Make a movement you have dreamt.
* A movement that goes back in time.
* A movement somebody else has made a long time ago.

* *The Concrete*
* The most concrete movement I can think of.
* A movement from the bed.
* A movement from the street.
* A movement from the kitchen.
* A movement that is what it does.
* A movement you do every day.

* *Impossibilities*
* Which is the movement you want to do but can’t.
* A movement so fast that it can’t be perceived.
* A movement so small that it can’t be noticed.
* A translocation/movement without any effort

* *Changes*
* Create a movement that goes from ambiguity to clarity.
* Create a movement that goes from clarity to ambiguity.
* Create a movement that goes from having high inner energy to low outer energy.
* Create a movement that starts out as political but becomes philosophical.
* Create a movement that starts from nowhere and ends with something you think is important.
* Create a movement that goes from being contained to explosive
* Create a movement that moves from one strength to another.
* Create a movement that transforms from concrete to spiritual.

* *Inner Movements*
* Make inner organs talk to each other.
* Dance the movement of your stomach.
* Dance to your own pulse.

* *To Think*
* Think one movement then do another.
* Think one movement while you are doing another.
* Think through in detail one movement then do it with out thinking.
* Make a movement somebody else has thought.
* Make a movement that nobody ever has thought.
* Make a movement without thinking, then think the same movement, then do it again.
* Think quickly, make slow movement.
* Make a movement without thinking, repeat the same movement while thinking.

* *To Feel*
* A movement emerging from an old pain.
* What I feel I feel when in stillness.
* A movement in precise sync with what I feel right now.
* The movement that is the absolute opposite of what I feel right now.
* A movement emerging from a pain somebody else feels.
* A movement that feels tremendous but can hardly be noticed.

* *The World Outside*
* A movement that comes out of a desire to change the world.
* A movement that comes out of a desire to improve the world.
* A movement that comes out of a desire to communicate with the world.
* A movement that comes out of a desire to be together.
* A movement that comes out of a desire not to be in this world.
* A movement that mirrors the world.
* A movement that mirrors those I care about.

* *Positions (in the space, in the garden)*
* I am I when I am in a position that’s my own, and in between those, I am everybody.
* (When I am in a position I have chosen I am I, when I move between them I am everybody.)
* I take a position where I can see myself better.
* (I take a position where I understand myself better.)
* I feel one thing in one position, and another when in a different position.
* (Different positions give me different things.)
* When I am in my position I am alone, that is good.
* (When I move between my different positions I am not alone, that’s also good.)
* When in my positions, I listen.
* (When in my positions, I listen with my whole body to the others.)
* (When in my positions, I listen with my whole body to myself.)
* My positions help me.
* (My positions are troublesome, complicated.)
* No silence or stillness is to be found.
* (My positions don’t offer any stillness, even if I am still.)

* *Tableaus*
* Each dancer prepares tableaus/choreographies/stagings of social situations that they remember from their life. They use the others in the ensemble to create their staging by giving them simple instructions for improvisation. The “choreographer” is very matter of fact in her work; adjusts, rehearses, directs and is also part of the staging.

* A dancer/choreographer makes a tableau/choreography that is a meeting between two other dancers. The “choreographer” is not participating.

* If possible: make a staging/tableau of a self-experienced moment of anarchic harmony.

Seen from a contemporary collective creation perspective, a task and process oriented methodology such as these instructions implicitly describe, is in no way a unique approach to thinking and working, rather I would say, it is quite common. It is a method that relies on improvisation and improvisation is at the core of the development of modern western theater and actor/dancer methodology.<sup>120</sup><div class="footnote"><sup></sup> </div> A brief way of describing how a task and process oriented methodology can be used, would be to say that it can either function as part of the creative process to gather and develop material, to investigate themes and form, or as the conceptual foundation for a performative presentation.<sup>121</sup><div class="footnote"><sup></sup> </div> In *Ryoani – A Meeting* I thought of the instructions both as an investigative tool as well as the basis for the performance. I did not anticipate a process that was first about finding/creating material and then this material would be put together into something more or less set. Instead I foresaw that the rehearsal process, working through the instructions, and all their alternatives and emerging variations, would generate a common sensitivity and a sense of a common theme. Creating the instructions was probably also a way for me to deal with the insecurity around not knowing how to get the movement going, where to begin.

Even if a conceptual set-up of this kind, with an improvisational frame as the starting point, was not something that I expected would be foreign to the dancers, I certainly anticipated that complications – or rather I should say, additional demands – would emerge when setting it in motion. Those complications, in the planning stage, all had to do with my role and capacity as director. First, if I, as a director, with a specific intention formulate a gamut of instructions/suggestions about where to start the improvisations, I should also consider and weigh if those changes that will be made by the individual performer (in the process) are in line with the quality/sensitivity that my original suggestions represent. The second area of complication that I anticipated was about judgment, i.e. the process of accommodating the individual need for feedback. I present the instructions, I encourage individual initiative and individual judgment in shaping the expression, the performers work, they create, they make suggestions, refine them, and in that process there is a need for a dialogue. How can that dialogue be formed, what kind of language can be used? How should I, as a non-choreographer with limited understanding of a dancer’s technique/practice, contribute to the process so that it evolves/proceeds in a constructive way, without making the fallacy of saying “that’s good” or, “that I don’t like so much”. It could be questioned if the task oriented methodology, and the emotional/psychological nature of some of the instructions are indicative of an attempt to merge a theatrical language with dance, and that my directorial contribution to the process was about molding an implicit narrative, though that was not how I thought about it. Rather the opposite, that the dance should be “just” dance.

## Elements for interaction and connection

The chosen methodology for the creative process consists both of structural components transferred from the Cage composition and of uniquely created elements that I inserted in the process/performance. Seen together the transferred components and the new elements constituted, in the planning of the performance, the only possible directorial measures. With that I mean that my intent when approaching the directorial task was to hone it down and use a very limited number of concrete measures to create the atmosphere of the performance and the intensity of the expression.  The first component that I transferred from the Cage composition was the idea of the timeline on which sections of activity were altered with sections of stillness (positions). These sections had, just like in the Cage composition, a specific duration and they each included specific components/activities. Hence, this timeline became an overarching structure, a “phrasing” of the performance as a whole.  A second component that was brought in from the musical composition was the collective playing of the accompanying part. Since percussionist Jonny Axelsson chose to play his part on wood and stone, I decided to have all performers, at two specific places in the performance, make music on stones. The first place when all the performers played the accompanying part was in the beginning, and they did it just by listening to and following the percussionist, not reading the score.<sup>122</sup><div class="footnote"><sup></sup> </div>  I extended this section quite radically in order to make it into something like an overture with a persistent nature. I wanted this long musical introduction to infuse the space with a specific temperature and a sense of time disconnected from the world outside. But I also thought about it as a means to shift the performer focus towards listening, towards a connectedness through sound and rhythm. I wanted to enhance that awareness in every possible way, as I wanted the dancers to be guided by “listening” also in their bodily relations.  The second place where all the performers made music on the stones was about two-thirds into the performance. At this point too, the idea of playing by listening and following what was heard was used, but instead of following the percussion part the performers followed/mirrored the sliding sound of the trombone, by grinding stone against stone. This moment of togetherness was inserted in order to generate an opposite, like a counter expression, to the diverse individuality of the dance. I saw these dynamic shifts, between an untamed diversity and a kind of “coming together”, as dramaturgically important since they emphasized what I regarded as the main theme: the continuous struggle/tension/grinding between the individual and the group.<sup>123</sup><div class="footnote"><sup></sup> </div>  

Transferred into the performance from the musical composition, I foresaw that these components would have a strong influence on the formal aspects but would not carry much of an expressive intent. They would not, in my eyes, be enough to infuse shifts in the expression. That is why I inserted/created two other elements to be part of the performance, elements that I thought of as dramaturgically and structurally necessary: the wooden shields and the masks. The shields I anticipated would have an effect on the quality of the movement, since the flow/rhythm of the dance had to be interrupted/changed when lifting/moving them. But the wooden shields also had the possibility of generating a variety of associations, as my instruction to the dancers was to treat them as their own personal belonging, as something they intimately related to, as if they represented a personal space (a house, a room, a bed). From the puzzling and seemingly meaningless activity of placing and replacing them, they symbolized a building, of sorts. The intention was to create a semiotic confusion: the decisive concreteness of the activity – radiating meaning – resulting in nothing but a beautiful meaninglessness.

Even if I could not fully foresee the dramaturgical effect of inserting the masks, I was certain that their presence was important. They were full-faced masks with no added features, made as copies of the individual performer’s face, that I thought was crucial since it bestowed on them a radiance beyond the archetypal.
	Kom ihåg bild!? Bra eller inte?

And, as a result, their expression stayed within the subjectivity of the performer, but added something of a fragile naiveté at the same time as they shielded their individuality.<sup>124</sup><div class="footnote"><sup></sup> </div>   [Link: documentation/section where all four performers meet carrying masks] Kom Ihåg!  Initially, I thought the masks would enhance the subjectivity of each performer, that the still expression would intensify the experience of subjectivity in the non-mask sections. However, the use of the masks was very much an experiment, and I cannot say that I was clear, either to myself or to the ensemble, about their full meaning. But if the purpose of the performative investigation was to set in motion “processes of socialization,” and to create an expression that moved between a level of abstract form (movement as movement) and a level of social interaction, I thought that the strong but shunning – in regards to the constitution of the subject – expression of the mask(s) would infuse a desirable complexity/unbalance.

The construction of the concept for the performance meant laying out material to be activated within specific circumstances. The relation between the material and the circumstances could then, to a greater or lesser degree, generate friction depending on how the material converged with the circumstances. In regards to this, I assumed that the tension between the implied “emotionality” of the instructions and the “dryness” (limitations) that the directorial elements constituted, would generate a disturbance that in turn would add a relevant intensity to the expression as a whole. From a directorial point of view, i.e. without actually going into if/how this was experienced, this was not a consciously investigated dynamic but more of an open question, a thought figure lurking in the background. I saw it as a polarity that could possibly enhance the theme of social interaction, and the ongoing struggle of positioning the subject in relation to all the surrounding phenomena.

## What is being investigated?

The performative investigation took place on divergent planes. Some questions I kept to myself, kind of on a sublevel of the directorial practice. They reverberated as assumptions, thus intuitively guided my esthetic choices. The one question that stood in the foreground on that unexposed level was about relations, or rather *relation-of-nonrelation*.  More specifically, if all occurrences – in the world – are singular events of non-relations and their perceptive coming together, in relations, is the expressive effect of co-creation, it follows that the multiplicity of expressions being played out in the performance cannot be regarded as disjunctive or meaningless. Instead it is a situation where this ongoing perceptive process is compressed, *actually brutally simplified*, as the occurrences are radically limited. The dramaturgical intent (assumption) behind such an outlook, is that the performative structure – placing sharply delineated movements/occurrences within a time-space outside, or rather next to, the perpetual perceptive process going on otherwise – constitutes a possibility for the co-composing subject to experience a continuous becoming. A determinant factor in this dynamic is – which of course is not unique for the performance of *Ryoanji – A Meeting* – the focus that the space-time demarcation of a performance situation generates in and by itself.<sup>125</sup><div class="footnote"><sup></sup> </div>  When conceptualizing the performance, my thought was that this focus would be further strengthened by the concentrated timbre and rhythmical “simplicity” of the music. I anticipated that, taken together, these forces – the unstoppable perceptive sequence, the space-time delineation of the performance situation, and the sharply defined “world” of the music – would bring differentials of experience together across their disjunction, hence transform the non-connectiveness to a unitary experiential effect. Though, I contrived to operate this effect non-consciously, which means that the idea of a clear and obvious connection between the perceptive experience and the performative expression must be abandoned: the notion of synchronization is devoid; the perceptive juxtapositions (the creative making-relation-of-nonrelation) cannot be thought of as one precise moment but an accumulated merging effect extended over time, spread apart, delayed, thus unclear, non-conscious.  

The consequence of a directorial approach that endorses the notion of relation-of-nonrelation as the dramaturgical base is that the determinant factors for the expressive possibilities are determined by which components are to be included. It could be said that such an observation is a simplification of the compositional challenge, but instead it should be understood as heightening the *importance of the significance of each component*.<sup>126</sup><div class="footnote"><sup></sup> </div> This aspect is hence strongly present in my approach to the directorial task – in *Ryoanji – A Meeting* as well in the other two performances that I refer to – as it shifts the directorial concern away from coordination, away from steering the specifics of the relations, and instead gears it towards choosing the components and towards carving out a methodology that presumably strengthens each of these individual components/performer expressions.  

If the investigative workings of the notion of relation-of-nonrelation can be said to be about processes of perception, the other plane on which the performative investigation in *Ryoanji – A Meeting* is meant to happen is on the inter-relational, social plane, and revolves around the question of how subjects are formed, and social relations manifested. The theories on subject-forming-factors, on a large sociological, psychological and cultural level, are diverse and each approach comprises numerous factors of a complex nature. Even if profoundly aware of this complexity, I found it interesting, and actually unavoidable to problematize the production of subjectivity and processes of inter-subjectivity.<sup>128</sup><div class="footnote"><sup></sup> </div> The reason I saw this as unavoidable should be traced to my overarching understanding of Cage’s esthetics, and to his vision of a (social) harmony, possible to find in an anarchic mode of multiple personalities – and expressions – existing side by side.<sup>129</sup><div class="footnote"><sup></sup> </div>  This understanding had to be considered in the esthetic/investigative intention of the performance since it, to such a high degree, involved the esthetic world of Cage.

The instructions to the dancers (listed above) were conceived of as the impetus for the (social) tension to occur. For the most part, they are concerned with and supportive of subjective choices and, as mentioned earlier, dependent on individual initiatives. Within that subjective framing they incite different themes, like: memories of emotions, emotions moving through time, loneliness/togetherness, social/emotional connectivity. This did not mean, however, that I imagined the movements would take on symbolic meaning and metaphorical associations, but instead this polarity – between the nature of the instructions and the lack of restrictions in regards to the formal specifics of the expressions – should be understood as a means to infuse pure variation of rhythm and expressive intensities with an urgency of a personal nature. The underlying thought was that the individual dancer would develop a material with its own specific quality and strength. When these then are set in motion it would come to a multiplicity of individual movements, different positions, status and focus. This would create a dynamic of relation-of-nonrelation, meaning that no fictive relations of a sort that could be recognized from outside the event itself, no relations outside the consolidation of the performative process, would exist. However, the initial dramaturgical impact of the simultaneous presence of human bodies is that they signal the possibility of social relations and the autonomy of the individual subject is therefore immediately put in flux/at risk by the presence of the other(s). The working of this dynamic is what I see as the basis for the investigation of the stability – and potential change (transformation) – of the individual performer subject. It is the perceptive dynamic and dramaturgical condition for asking – through the performative enactment – questions like: What does the convergence of the many different individual expressive trajectories do to their subjective initial intention? Does the convergence of the individual expressive trajectories cause shifts in their expression? Can we think about their effect on each other as social contamination? How can this contamination be manifested? What happens to the experience of relations when (social, emotional) contamination is revealed in the performative expression? These questions (and their many extensions) were central to my directorial thinking since I wanted the expression as a whole to be about influences, instability, exchange and an interlacing of subjectivities. Though, I thought of the convergence – and transference – of energies not as something explicit, but as an activation of the senses, hence more as a shared listening to all the surrounding activities. An example of such an extended notion of listening is given by musician Ivo Nilsson when he says: “As I see it the listening is not only acoustic. I listen to a body that is behind me, I mean I maybe don’t hear it but I feel its presence and that is also a kind of listening. Listening is the resonance that’s in the room. There are different planes, the audible percussion and the breathing from the dancers, and the audience” (Nilsson/ Axelsson, Interview 1, 10.30). The directorial intention was thus to sustain a sensitivity for the transferences of both explicit movements (mimicry) and for expressive intensities (emotional contagion). Such sequences of transference could however clearly be played out simplistically (naively), and therefore the direction had to infuse the possibility for this exchange/transference to operate on an almost subconscious level.

The investigative aspect of the performative-setting-in-motion relation-of-nonrelation is open ended. No conclusive result can be expected, or even aimed for. Each and all experiences of emerging configurations are ineffable and that is why I think the notion of investigation should be complemented with the notion of potentiality, or rather: conditions for potentialities. The investigation into performative contamination (social, emotional) is just as evasive on a perceptual level, but it also has a concrete aspect. This aspect is about the challenge to carve out a directorial methodology that is both clear (in the sense of sensible/ understandable and useful), at the same time as it corresponds to and relies on the refinement that the concept of the subconscious represents. It is only this last aspect of the investigative intention that is exposed in the creative process, and therefore the only aspect that is somewhat possible to attend to with directorial measures.

## What do I see?

Can the perceptive intentions that I describe above be detected when watching the documentations? Looking at them is certainly not like the experience of being in the space during the performance, but to what degree do they indicate the possibilities of the dramaturgical thinking? And furthermore, what would be the point of testing the durability of the perceptive intention through a reflection done by myself? Inevitably it will be colored by my deeply subjective position. Moreover, even if an attempt at a critical rendering can strive towards a time of coexistence with the event being examined, the following reflections are nothing like that. Instead these “notes” should be seen as a further exposition of the way I think as a director, and a guide to how I predicted the individual audience member would/could possibly react, feel, and suppose, hence as a reactivation of the initial dramaturgical ideas.

>The seemingly long musical introduction is there to reconfigure the listening, to heighten perceptive sensitivity, but when looking/listening I sense the fragility in that intent. I get impatient. This feeling is probably enhanced by listening/looking without actually being there, from not getting a spatial experience of the timbre. My sense of the performers is initially not as dancers, I see persons standing, sitting around the performance space. I feel uncertain about who/what they are, and what are they going to do? This uncertainty is dramaturgically important, and indicative of a sort of wavering perceptive quality that I want the performance to radiate throughout. The wooden shields standing against the walls around the room contribute to this uncertainty but their perceptive impact is not sensed much until the performers start to relate to them, which initially happens just by positioning their bodies close to them (not carrying), but done with a sense of intimacy. The extreme frequencies of the trombone (“What is that sound?”) enhance, significantly, my experience of being in something unknown. This is the opening; deliberately unclear and encouraging questions like: What is this? Who are they? What are they doing? What is this sound? Is it music? What are those wooden things? – all intended to trigger a sense of uncertainty about the expressive aim.

>The movements become bigger, the dancers start to inhabit the space and I observe, with curiosity, their varying characteristics. Some are more architectural, some more naturalistic (narrative, metaphorical, emotional), some enter into pure variation and rhythm. I see this as subjective, (compositional, improvisational) choices of quality and the variety is sought-after. The four performers slowly become personalities. I don’t get a strong experience of an inner urge, more as if they are exposing their compositional ideas. Then this impression changes when bodily formations/combinations with two or more dancers are created. Though, in the coming-together of bodies there is a sense of sustainability, so somehow each individual compositional trajectory is kept quite stable. It is from this individual stability (insistence) that the working of relation-of-nonrelation is set in motion as the relations are not indicative of social relations but rather compositional, which is dramaturgically expected. The intensity, or rather lack of an obvious urgency to compositionally connect, triggers me to focus on small, intricate details of one dancer’s improvisation, then in the next moment I see the larger formation - the expression of the two (or three, or four) dancers simultaneously inhabiting my gaze – as a mesh of movements that bounce off and against each other. This sense is sustained until rhythmical relations of a more conventional connective character occur: common pauses, simultaneous and similar outbursts of energy. Such expressive figurations are signs of contamination, a phenomena thought of in the conceptual formulations as exchanges of an emotional and social nature, but often I sense that they radiate compositional choices rather than an intersubjective social dynamic. The bearing and repositioning of the wooden shields has the desired effect; both unpredictable and necessary. I not only ponder what they are for, but in the precise moment of lifting and carrying the shield, I also wonder: Where is she going to place it? Is she/they going to build something with them?

>When the music stops things happen. I see the space and all the relations differently. My directorial prediction of the impact of this moment was not concise, but I did foresee that it would cause shifts. The elimination of the sound is first and foremost a variation, a difference and it fuses something of a relocation of the perception. Mainly so because it opens up the space to the fragility of attention: there is nothing to rest in. It causes a slight sense of the performer(s) being lost, for a moment, but it also seems to activate tighter formations, compositional relations of a different kind, and an increase in the intensity of the movements.

>I take myself through different “solutions” during the experience of looking. I swing from being intensely focused on the rhythmical and expressive details of one dancer, to experiencing the multiplicity of the many, wondering, seeking, creating connections between the movements (co-composition) as well as between the individual performers. The experience of social relations and connectivity/tension does not really occur until all four dancers put their masks on and are gathered together center stage. This sequence stands out because of its non-dance character, but also because of the nature of the contact between the performing subjects: they face each other, they indicate social communication and they “talk” with a kind of naïve theatricality. The refinement of the dancers expression is gone now and the over all quality is quite crude. This moment, as a discrete part, is both an expression that fuses interpretations, but it is also throws light on the activities – and relations – before and after this quite awkward gathering.

>The simultaneous lifting of the shields, and the collective forming of “spaces” by placing them in close relation to each other is a performative problematization of coming together, of communication and collective creation. The possible metaphorical connotation of building, the manifestation of relations, mirrors the collective process leading up to it. The whole sequence is a joint movement and the placing of the shields is an organizational attempt, of sorts. Though, there is no clarity – in regards to the meaning of the shields – to be found: they radiate, both in their form and in the handling of them, the dubiousness of sharpness and meaninglessness. When, at the end, they are just standing there, leaning against the wall, I think of the now absent dancers, how they have been carrying them around for the last hour with authority and direction; but why and towards what?

>The overall expression of the performance radiates a certain coolness. This observation is important because it points to a complex perceptive dynamic that plays out strongly within myself, and lies at the core of what I want to create – and investigate. This sought-after dynamic rests on the idea that the musical world, the atmosphere (time, temperature, intensity) created in the room by the sounds, becomes a domain of possibilities. This domain is only accessible, as a different and unknown space, if its limitations are accepted and received as an offering. It has, and has not, an insisting energy; it does not push or place itself in the foreground but it is inescapable; it only nourishes if one allows it to be so; it is not cold but has a self-sustained atmosphere of coolness.<sup>130</sup><div class="footnote"><sup></sup> </div> This intensity/temperature is what I envision functions as the antithesis of the subjective expression: the strength (its delineation: capacity, expressive aim and existential urge) of the performing subject is illuminated by the space-time (“world”) ensuing from the music. There lies a loneliness: the non-narrative, the non-semiotic, non-representational expression of the music both isolates the expressive subject at the same time as it embraces (carries, stabilizes) it.   

Dance can, through specific compositional decisions, break itself up, empty itself of symbolic meaning and metaphorical associations and become pure variation of rhythm and intensities. However, the conceptual formulations in *Ryoanji – A Meeting* did not specifically emphasize such an intention but strove to investigate the expressive landscape that contained both non-representative expressive intensities and expressive figurations in which the human body was a vessel of subjective emotions and reactions. When I look at the documentations I certainly see the potential for this but I also become acutely aware of the fragility of the co-compositional, co-creative intent in the dramaturgical set-up.

## Vulnerability unrevealed

Clearly, the creative process and the performances of *Ryoanji – A Meeting* include the main themes in this research work – immanent collective creative processes; creative hierarchy; compositional and dramaturgical problematization. But there are three aspects, closely intertwined, that stand out when I look at how I created the structure and how I anticipated that the work would proceed. Firstly, I see my urge to engage in a process in which I don’t know how to “be”, how to proceed, or how to position myself as director within the collaborative process. Secondly, it is clear that the insecurity that this could possibly generate, is held at bay by placing it in a very well defined structure, and that this polarity – between the sharply structured time-space of the Cage composition and the openness of the process – mirrors the dramaturgical presumption that multiplicities, superimpositions and multi-vocality represent a richness when placed inside a “world”. And, thirdly, my limited capability of contributing to the development of the choreographic material through more detailed suggestions regarding the specifics of the movements, forced me to create a set of tools, a methodological “language” built on concrete measures, measures that – I predicted – would infuse the work with an esthetic consequence, in line with my communicative intention.

But these aspects are not what make the work with the performance of *Ryoanji – A Meeting* different from the other two (they are to a certain degree present in all three performances). Instead, they differ because Ryoanji – A Meeting does not in any way *expose its investigative intention*. It does not performatively reveal its inbuilt vulnerability, like the chance procedure and open discussion about collective creation in *John and the Mushrooms* does, or the openly displayed conflicts around creative responsibility, revealed in *vorschläge*. *Ryoanji – A Meeting* can therefore be said to withhold – take responsibility for – its own risk-taking. The exposure of the investigative questions and the performative presentation of problems (creative, collaborative, hierarchical, esthetic), that happen in *John and the Mushrooms* and in *vorschläge*, introduce the theme of untangling, setting off a mode that there is something to be solved, and the dramaturgy is constructed to increase the readiness in the audience to participate in this untangling. In *Ryoanji – A Meeting* no such introduction is offered. On the contrary, all the indeterminate factors are undisclosed. The vulnerability of the performance is disguised in a formal strictness.<sup>131</sup><div class="footnote"><sup></sup> </div> The sharp formal borders and undifferentiated mode of the music and set design – as well as the relative homogeneity of the performers’ expressions – create a sense of a delineated (artefactual) esthetic domain, which counteracts an investigative, co-compositional perceptive approach.

The directorial intent was obviously not to let this formal stability become a hindrance for a co-compositional engagement. Instead, the condensed characteristics of the expressive matter and of the compositional/dramaturgical form were thought of as something that would relocate the focus and calibrate the dynamics for the co-compositional activity. This should be understood as a honing-in on a different (compared to *John and the Mushrooms*) type of relation-of-nonrelation. There are three factors that sustain this concentration, this honing-in. Firstly, the fact that the problematizations are not explicitly exposed/introduced and that the theme of untangling is concealed. Secondly, the formal stability makes the differences between the individual expressive trajectories seem less sharp, more about rhythm and intensities *within the same idiomatic domain*. And thirdly, the intensity of the performer’s movements indicates possible social relations. Taken together, these factors make the workings of relation-of-nonrelation, so to speak, more finely tuned and they play out perceptively within a dynamic span concurrent with the subtleness of social contamination.

The difference in how the investigation/problematiztion performatively develops in *Ryoanji – A Meeting*, is one of the reasons that it complements the explication on creative responsibility and the production of meaning that I present in the following essays. It highlights a perceptive situation where a formal strictness has to be broken through in order to find access to the workings of relation-of-nonrelation and a co-compositional engagement. I therefore suggest that the exploration of the specific circumstances in the performance of *Ryoanji – A Meeting* increases the relevance of my critical reasoning to examples where an investigative deconstruction is not explicitly exposed.  
