**IUP:** Your last seminar here at the institute, when you presented your text *The Rhythm of Thinking*, ended kind of abruptly, and there was no time to ask questions or to discuss the ideas that you laid out. So, that’s where I would like to start our conversation today. And then, since I know we don’t have many opportunities to meet in the near future, I would like to take up some questions that we haven’t had time to talk about, if that’s okay?

**JP:** Of course!

**IUP:** I don’t find it strange that you bring up the aspect of ethics, as it has been reverberating, at least in me, throughout our conversations. Mainly, because you have continuously returned to the aspect of social relations. In our previous discussions you have talked about your use of the concept of immanence in the collaborative processes and also how you activate this concept when thinking about the exchange between the performance and the audience. So, why are you not talking about the ethics of immanence? Deleuze, whom you often refer to, formulated an immanent ethics as “a set of ‘facilitative’ rules that evaluates what we do, say, and think according to the immanent mode of existence” (Smith in Jun and Smith 2011, 124). That’s an extremely brief formulation, and not explicative of how it is developed as contrary to the constraining rules of a transcendent ’morality,’ but it seems consilient with the perceptive dynamic that you strive for, and of what you call ‘a vision of the subject’. Why have you not chosen to, more closely, attach your reasoning around ethics to what I understand is a rich and important discourse of philosophical thinking, an immanent ethics? I mean, isn’t the definition that you use quite limited?

**JP:** Rich and important, I am not sure I would use those words. But it is a complex area of philosophical thinking and to grasp it in some kind of entirety and to create your own understanding, which is necessary in order to activate it in this more concrete way that I am trying to do, then the strands of thinking you need to follow are numerous. Just to give one very interesting example is to mention an essay by Daniel W Smith called *Deleuze and the Question of Desire: Towards an Immanent Theory of Ethics*, in which he develops a line of thought that looks on an ethics of immanence in relation to a theory of desire. In this text, Smith outlines the heritage of Deleuzian thinking around an immanent ethics in relation to Spinoza and Nietzsche, and then, in order to more closely link it to the question of desire, he points out the importance of Freud and Lacan, and also furthers his reasoning by looking at Nietzsche through Leibnitz (Smith in Jun and Smith 2011).  However, and this is what I want to get to, even if one could say that Smith’s rather short essay points out quite a few possible extensions into dramaturgical problematizations – especially because it extrapolates a political dimension to an immanent ethics – it is an example of a philosophical practice that encompasses levels and concepts in a way that my specific reasoning, at least at this point, would not gain from engaging with. To tie the dramaturgical thinking deeper into a philosophical complexity that doesn’t constructively provoke questions around composition, does not interest me. The understanding of the concept of ethics, the way I use it, must instead be understood as transdisciplinary rather than an elaboration of its philosophical complexity. With that I mean that its grounding can also be found in theories on human capacity that are developed in pedagogy, or in psychology. For instance, in the theories of Reggio Emilia pedagogy, that I worked with in the production of *John and the Mushrooms*, which is, to put it briefly, built around the question of how the creative vitality and knowledge in each individual subject can be supported through an affirmative and creative pedagogy. Those are the kind of ethico-esthetical links I actually want to investigate more. But sure, in view of the very compressed formulation of an immanent ethics, which is that it is opposed to transcendence, or to universals, and as such criticizes “anything that *separates* a mode of existence from its power of acting” then it is linked to the dynamics of immanent collective creation – and perception (Smith in Jun and Smith 2011, 125). The relation is clear.

**IUP:** Considering this depth of the concept, and of your specific demarcation of its meaning, why don’t you make an effort to search for concrete formulations? If I remember correctly, you have said that it is constructive to apply an explanatory approach, rather than to attach the reasoning to existing, often complex and multifaceted concepts. So, again why is it necessary to talk about ethics?

**JP:** I did answer that question in my paper, but one thing I didn’t say was that to insist on an ethical reading of experimentation is to emphasize that there is a political urgency in the attempt, beyond the level of curious investigation. That has always been, I think, the conviction of the avant-garde. But it just doesn’t seem to lose its actuality, or the need to keep saying it. We can’t just hand over the issue of ethics to those who fill the stage with predictable, and often righteous narratives that expose what we already know. I think it would be interesting to more persistently ask if *that*, in its conformism, is unethical, even if it has its ”heart in the right place”. In view of, let’s say, the last hundred years of western art history, it feels kind of flat, almost naïve, to come back to this observation. But, just because an avant-garde modus has this strong ethical aspect, or potential, it’s impossible to leave it unsaid.

**IUP:** When you bring in the avant-garde, and its place in history and claim that there is an inherent potential in its mode, I come to think of Bruno Latour and his essay *An Attempt on a “Compositionist Manifesto”* in which he criticizes the avant-garde phenomena as being blindly devoted to the idea of progress and that “the flow of time had one – and only one – *inevitable* and *irreversible direction”?* (Latour 2010, 472) His argument is that this progress, embraced by the avant-garde, is not sensitive, or attentive to the immanence of the world. I don’t want to get away from our discussion on ethics, but how do you respond to such a criticism and how does it coalesce with your embracement of the term?

**JP:** It’s a bit of a jump to start talking about that text. But yes, Latour’s view on the avant-garde is relevant in this framework, and his essay certainly has a political urgency. Because that is what it is, a cultural-epistemological-political argument. It is situated in a political realm and within a discussion around how to critically approach the prevailing mode in which academic politico-philosophical analysis is carried out. It is not referring to esthetic circumstances, to dramaturgical questions, or questions about perception. And, it is within that framework that I use the term avant-garde. It should be understood as signifying a mode of formal experimentation conjoined with a conviction that there are alternative ways of forming – and relating to – expressive phenomena. As I understand the introductory reasoning in Latour’s text around the phenomena of an avant-garde, is not that he criticizes the avant-garde from that angle but because it contributes to a type of critique that produces a polarity. His whole reason to formulate a Compositionist manifesto is to refute a political analysis that places itself so much in opposition to the prevailing circumstances that it fails to make use of what Latour actually labels the immanent level. It is an argument against the idea that what’s desirable lies beyond the actual. It criticizes the intellectual-critical stance that a solution of the world’s problems, lies in the type of progress that transforms existing energies instead of acknowledging them.

**IUP:** And how do you see that his use of the concept of immanence relates to how you use it in a dramaturgical context?

**JP:** Even if I can see that there is a potential for connections between Latour’s essay and the kind of micro workings that I try to focus on, and that such a connection is enriching as it holds a strong political outlook, I feel a bit reluctant to make too much of what could be seen as correlations. His essay has a broad perspective and it elaborates with the notion of science studies and cultural, political criticism and he decomposes three fields, which are critique, nature and progress. This all means that the ramifications of his reasoning goes quite far beyond what I try to carve out.  But in respect to his criticism of forming a critique by exposing conflict and delineating contradictory poles – which is akin to the two-world-view that representation produces – there is a correlation. The dramaturgical attempt is *not* to explicitly formulate an alternative to the prevailing conditions, to narratively present a stance, offer an opinion that would lead to a change of the present situation. The performances offer the possibility to engage in a process. A material process, where things are what they are, and they are multiple. That I see, as being in line with the critical mode that compositionism presents which is that “there is no world beyond. It is all about *immanence.*” (Latour 2010, 475)

**IUP:** The fact that Latour’s reasoning activates concepts like process and immanence, terms that are central in your own work, would you be inclined to make other connections between his essay and the theories you present?

**JP:** I think so, and this actually brings us back to the aspect of ethics. When Latour says that compositionism searches for a universalism, taking up the task of building a common world, it is not in a homogenous sense but a “world that has to be built from utterly heterogeneous parts that will never make a whole. But at best a fragile, revisable, and diverse composite material”, he is aligned with the idea of multiplicity and the crucial importance of difference.

**IUP:** And why does that bring us back to the question of ethics?

**JP:** Well, in my dramaturgical and compositional thinking the attempt is to transpose this heterogeneity and fragility, precisely because it structurally carries an ethics and signifies a vision of the subject. In that transposition a formal experimentation is not only necessary but made into an important component, and that’s where we come back to the notion of the avant-garde.  

**IUP:** Many contemporary artists are engaged in developing socially engaged practices that provoke conformist ideas about what art should look like, where it should be placed, and how it can be formed through interactivity and participation – yes, I know that you want to avoid that word – *and* many of the thoughts that are developed within these practices evolve around their ethical connotations and impact. These are observations that have been theorized and problematized by quite a few critics, for example by Claire Bishop. In her writing, I can see a relevance to what you are talking about, that it connects to your thinking. Is it not so for you?

**JP:** I don’t dismiss the term participation, but the way it has been used in recent art theory it seems a bit too coarse to bring into the dramaturgical and compositional reasoning I’m trying to develop, that’s all. With that said, when it is problematized in such a thorough and interesting way as done by Claire Bishop I can certainly see a relevance, for example, in her problematiztion of evaluating art works that are built on active participation (Bishop 2012). She notes that there is a tacit hierarchy between experiences that can be labeled “esthetic” and those that are “participatory,” where the latter ones are seen as creating “real efficacy,” while the former do not. In her criticism of this perceptive dynamic and the question of value, she makes two points that in different ways, and with different intensities, mirror what I have been talking about. The first is her observation that socially engaged art practices often claim to be uninterested in the esthetic side of presentation, and the intention is to create a social lacing, a social exchange. I think she talks about it as social achievements. In other words, the aspiration is to move beyond art, but “never to the point of comparison with comparable projects in the social domain,” which means that its outcome is not critically judged in relation to the work of pedagogues or museum educators for example (Bishop 2012, 19).

**IUP:** I am sorry if I’m interrupting, but how do you see that this relates to your way of thinking?

**JP:** Well, it does, so to speak, by not relating to it. The performances that I make don’t strive for their own abolition, they don’t move beyond theater, really, even if I think they do. They are situated in conservative institutions and are confined not only by their locality, but also by preconceived notions of what kind of presentational forms usually occur in these places. The examples that Claire Bishop takes up show that many artists are not concerned with creating works of art, but instead interested in generating new forms of relations outside the museum, changing the nature, or temperature, of the spaces where life takes place. Such a strategy is understandable as it is an escape from the confinements of the institution; places that not only symbolize, but connote forces that do not stand for engagement and vital relations. The kind of theater that I make is, for the most part, not doing that. It is captured within institutions signifying art as disconnected from life. The “escape” is instead thought of as happening on the esthetic level, only.  The theater is then not criticizing itself, as a meaningful, or meaningless, institution, but it is criticizing theater as a spectacle, as something separated from the potentiality of invention. Anyway, to get to the second point, Bishop argues that the evaluation of socially engaged art, inducing participation, is not only about esthetic hierarchy, so far as the participatory work is seen as “better” than those that are not, but also that there is an ethical evaluation intrinsic to it. Meaning, that developing work through social processes, through listening and interaction, has an ethical efficacy that art works that focus on aspects conventionally labeled esthetic, do not have. As I see it, here lies the problem. The activity that I talked about in my paper *The Rhythm of Thinking*, as encompassing the possibility of an ethical momentum, is a perceptive process in the individual. It is not a social activity. It’s the activity of individually inventing within his/her own inner world. I don’t see the need to regard these two views of where the ethical impact lies as necessarily effacing each other *but* if the actual experience of socially engaged art is a sense of repression and confinement, it underscores the importance of the question of how ethics can be talked about, and viewed, as an inner world experience. In other words, within a purely esthetic experience.

**IUP:** Mirroring what Rancière calls esthetic efficacy?

**JP:** Well, what’s most relevant can be found in Rancière’s further reasoning that there is an ethical *immediacy* in this, that the ethical is covered, or hidden within, *and* that the efficacy “is produced by the very rupturing of any kind of determinate link between cause and effect” (Rancière 2009, 63). In this we can find what I have talked about as the level outside language, beyond ideas and messages.

**IUP:** So, in your eyes the notion that an esthetic focus is devoid of an ethical impact, and socially engaged art automatically is charged with it, is a simplification?

**JP:** It’s not only a simplification but a disregarding of the power of the sensual. The ethical aspect is then not to be found in the affective responses that the performances generate but in the way they are made.

**IUP:**  Which leads us to a question I need to ask. Why haven’t you included the collective creative process in your thinking around ethics? Particularly because I know that you have, quite extensively, looked at the issue of hierarchy within collective collaboration. Why have you chosen to exclude that aspect?

**JP:** There are two main reasons. The first is that the ethical aspect of group work and creative collaboration – which is a compound of social interaction, of creative and social hierarchy, of emotionality and professionalism – is *not* an aspect that I see as connected to dramaturgy or composition. The second reason is that the ethical way, so to speak, to investigate and illuminate the ethical aspect of group work should, I think, grow from a vital and suspended dialogue with everybody involved.

**IUP:** But surely, it must be possible and quite interesting to look at creative collaborative work, with ethics as a focus.

**JP:** Certainly, and it has probably been done. In other fields where collaboration is central but where art production is not the objective – which are plenty, to say the least – I know that critical studies on ethics can be found. What could be asked though, in view of ethics and my reasoning about the perceptive process encapsulating the possibility of becoming, is how those aspects can also be applied to the performers and their experience when performing. They are involved in a creative process that is a mixture of tension and release, of feeling uncomfortable and of feeling balanced. I understand that at certain moments the performers sense that their creative invention falls into place and that there is something of a complete connection in and between their doings, their bodies and the doings and rhythms of the others. At other times they might feel the opposite, incompleteness and disconnection. This vulnerability mirrors the perceptive dynamic of co-creation and the possibility of a sense of becoming, so a deepened study into the performer’s experience could evolve around the question whether or not their creative activity produces a sense of becoming. Such a question would be one way of talking about ethics within the creative collective.

**IUP:** I get slightly confused, and the same thing happened when I listened to your presentation of your text *The Rhythm of Thinking*, because on the one hand you talk about becoming as an ontological process, and then at one point you talk about it as being “produced.” Isn’t there a contradiction here?

**JP:** Yes, I see what you mean and I can only agree with you. I think one can say that it stems from appropriation, from moving it and activating the concept within the specific circumstances of art perception. Life is an ontological process in and of itself; it’s not there because it’s pointed out, and it doesn’t stop if we choose to pick mushrooms instead of talking about it. If I say: “being is becoming” it’s an observation that doesn’t disturb its movement, but to say that the intention of a performance is to enable an *experience* of becoming is to disturb the immanent movement of the concepts. Though, such contradictions are the collateral damage, so to speak, that comes with the attempt to align the reflections with a philosophical discourse that by nature is interested in the full complexity of forces that inhabit life as a whole, as it unfolds in the world *outside* the performative event.

**IUP:** Maybe somebody would say that the experience of co-composing and becoming should be described as an emancipatory experience rather than being about ethics. Can’t emancipation be seen as exactly what you are talking about, as the verification of the vitality of the individual inventing?

**JP:** Well, I have not talked about the actual experience as being ethical or not – I don’t see that as possible – but tried to outline possibilities to think about ethics within dramaturgy and composition. The idea of emancipation through an esthetic experience, and especially so in the history of western theater, is central. But in that tradition the dominating line of thought is one where emancipation has a revelatory quality and *not* one of ongoing contemplation and invention. The politics of theater have regarded, and still do, emancipation as the uncovering of truth, a light is let in, or, as Rancière puts it, as a “re-appropriation of a relationship to self lost in a process of separation” (Rancière 2009, 15). But, even if it’s not really relevant to align the co-compositional experience with one of emancipation, it helps to distinguish the type of investment, the activity of inventing, the contemplative movement, and the notion of “work” attached to co-composition. However, we have to commence with the fact that we don’t know anything about the perceptive activities – the workings of co-composition – within the individual. The ethics cannot lie in asserting that the outcome is so and so. It is all about the potentiality.  

**IUP:** I can’t refrain from feeling that there is something of an unlimited acceptance, a shimmer of “everything goes” that looms over an esthetic based on what you suggest. Like an all-embracing atmosphere, and it disturbs me somehow. It’s like claiming that narration should be abandoned, that the notion of the artifact is useless, that beauty, the organized rhythm, the possibilities within thoroughly composed structures is meaningless. Is there not a power in an exclamatory form that has the potential to move the perceiver in the same ethical directions that you envision?

**JP:** The power in what you call an “exclamatory form” is one of subsumption, and the illusion of transcendence. With all due respect, I don’t see the need to once more go through how I think about this in terms of dramaturgy, composition and perception. As to your comment that an immanent esthetics, or an esthetics in which immanent movements are sought after, equals an attitude that “everything goes,” I would say, is a misconstruction. Yes, I think of my art as affirmative projects, as affirmative of a fundamentally positive vision of the ethical subject. Rather than focusing on conflict, friction, fragility or mourning, the performances place positivity, vitality and undiscovered possibilities, in the foreground. Does that mean that there is no discipline? Does that mean that there is no vulnerability? Does that mean that there is no criticism or conflict involved? Of course not. The dramaturgical constructions that I work with are quite contained and disciplined, just like the material I place within them. It is not about letting everything just hang out. Your comment is good because it allows me to again point out that the specific quality of the material *also* is indicative of an ethics. And by that I mean that the compositional details *within* the material cannot be overlooked. Then, in regards to your comment about unlimited acceptance, indicating that there is some kind of an overall consensus covering the expression, like a blanket, I can just say that a positive vision of the subject does *not* “deny conflict, tension, or even violent disagreements between different subjects” (Braidotti 2011, 303). I actually see conflict not only as one of the driving forces, but as something that the expression should nourish – and – be capable of harboring. The ethics could actually be said to be about inventing, accepting and sustaining relations of a conflictual type.

**IUP:** If I put what you are saying now in relation to what you said in your paper *The Rhythm of Thinking*, in which you placed an emphasis on the activity of thinking as an “indispensible inner movement,” I wonder if it’s there, in the thinking, that you see the conflicts playing out? That the figuring-out is the handling of conflicts? If so, isn’t it trapped in the void of the mind? Doesn’t the conflict then become mysterious, useless, what does it help to resolve?
JP The “conflicts” are the reason and the source for inventions and for co-composing the never-before-experienced. They are the energy behind, and also within, the activity, and to establish compositional structures that treat forces of a contradictory type as non-conflictual is to accept their co-existence. Maybe such a dynamic finds its strongest potentiality if we consider that the expressional “conflicts” are constituted by human beings creating individual expressive trajectories. You know, in view of this it’s interesting to go back to what we talked about earlier and Claire Bishop’s constructive critique of participation. I have not experienced so-called participatory work as something that opens up to the unknown. Instead it has given me the experience that I am engaged in, and thinking about the molding of social consistency. It is a dynamic that is similar to when I come into a dinner party, or when I am at a conference, or when I meet new students for a course or other situations in life where a social form is taking shape. It is not about co-creating something never-before-experienced. What I am saying is that my experiences of participation, whether in the theater or in a wider art context, have not been sensual, esthetic experiences, but they have been social experiences. Maybe they have been interesting to be a part of, but the coping with the social aspect and interacting in the social weave have, so to speak, repressed other more sensual and expansive types of experiences. I guess my point is, the conflicts that I have sensed in participatory art situations have *also* been of a social nature. My take on art formed by socially engaged practices, is that the exposition of conflicts is seen as useful for resolving things, but also that there is an inclination towards consensus that stymies the movement of thinking.

**IUP:** That is a generalization, but I understand it comes from your experience.

**JP:** Of course it is, but it leads me to the point that the idea of resolving something is totally irrelevant within the esthetic framework that I am outlining. The immanent movement is perpetual and likewise the emergence of the new, and the intention is to create an experience where this is sensed as a vital expansion, beyond any type of resolution, thus mirroring Deleuze’s assertion that when “consciousness abandons solutions and interpretations, it thus acquires its light, its gestures and its sounds, its decisive transformation” (Murray 1997, 256).

**IUP:** But then, if there is an ethics in the attempt to infuse vital movements of thought in the individual, how do you formulate yourself around the unavoidable question of how this is transposed onto relations outside the performance? How does it have an impact on relations in the world, to other beings? Your reasoning conjures up an image of an enclosed circular movement, and I get, to put it bluntly, frustrated from not hearing you talk about its transformational potential, its impact on the world.

**JP:** I can say many things in response to your questions, but perhaps the two most important are that when expanding into the discourse that such a transformation signifies, the stakes are broadened. It obviously opens up to inter-relational situations and the thinking has to be stabilized through much wider references, and treated in a different way. Which leads me to the second point which is, to make such an expansion the aspect of ethics is pulled away from being problematized in relation to esthetics. I must insist on that demarcation for the sake of staying somewhat within my practice. With that said, there is of course a transformational thought behind everything. I would not be able to think of my work as political otherwise, that there are, so to speak, envisioned repercussions of the esthetics. I mean, if I say that the compositional thinking is guided by the conviction that “an ethics which eschews immanence invariably sunders us from our powers and capacities”, it makes me think of the building of the structure as a way to establish a link between the two worlds. (Surin 2011, 144) But there is no immediate success to be found. Such signs are ruptured, to use Rancière’s word. It instigates a mode with the hope that it should influence the individual in regards to how she perceives and moves in the world. If we take the notion of movement in thinking as an example, I would say that the question of whether or not an art piece can be regarded as more or less ethical depending on what kind of thinking processes it encourages, can only be based on the presumption that if the thinking is fluid, the possibility for actions that *don’t* consider the consequences of this action in the outside world, is less likely to take place. The vitality of the thinking then becomes not only the determining mode of your own existence but also the determining mode for your outlook on all existence.

**IUP:** It is the transference of the activity from one situation, the perception of the performance, to being in life elsewhere, this I can see. Though, how do you relate that observation to the Deleuzian/Guattarian assertion that the success of a revolution “resides only in itself, precisely in the vibrations, clinches, and openings it gave to men and women at the moment of its making and that composes in itself a monument that is always in the process of becoming, like those tumuli to which each new traveler adds a stone. The victory of a revolution is immanent and consists in the new bonds it installs between people, even if these bonds last no longer than the revolution’s fused material and quickly give way to division and betrayal” (Deleuze, Guattari 1994, 177).

**JP:** Are you suggesting that what Deleuze and Guattari are saying is that all attempts are in vain? That it should be understood as if the power of affect, of art, is ephemeral? That’s a way of reading it, and I don’t want to argue with that, but it also points to the power of the moment of the experience, and the possibility of a vibrating success. The potentiality of this success is what keeps me doing what I do, even if there is betrayal around every corner. Though, and this is what I think we’re talking about throughout this conversation, it would be too simple to think that this revolutionary potential, as a vibrating phenomena open to its own making, can ensue in any esthetic surrounding. I mean, the political does not lie in pointing out and insisting that this potentiality of a revolution is there to be found, but instead in developing a critique that explores under which circumstances it can occur.

**IUP:** It is interesting to put your reasoning in relation to Walter Benjamin’s text *The Author as Producer*, which is a text that to a large extent also revolves around theater and Brecht, dramaturgy and the question of power. To engage in a thorough critique of power is in Benjamin’s analysis closely tied to questioning how the production means are allocated; a central value of art must be to oppose its means of production.

**JP:** Yes, I have come to understand that that text turns up quite often as a reference when discussing contemporary art and its socio-political impact. Though, even if the context of Benjamin’s reasoning is highly political, it should also be understood as a dramaturgical proclamation as he places his thoughts in the midst of creative activities, theater making and literary writing, and therefore it’s unavoidable that it has an impact on the dramaturgical, structural specifics of art. He says that, “to supply a production apparatus without trying, within the limits of the possible, to change it, is a highly disputable activity even when the material supplied appears to be of a revolutionary nature. “ (Benjamin 1998, 94) This is almost mirrored by Deleuze who says that the “actual power of theater is inseparable from a representation of power in theater, even if it is a critical representation” (Murray 1997, 241). To acknowledge the kindred, I would almost say complementary, relationship between Benjamin’s text and Deleuze’s allows both for an enhanced political reading of Deleuze as well as a reaffirmation of Benjamin’s strong engagement in trying to disentangle the relationship between structural specifics of art and its perceptive possibilities.   

**IUP:** Sometimes I wonder to what extent audiences really *want* that power to be exposed; the power of the institution, the power of representation. I understand fully that it is a tricky angle to use when developing dramaturgical and compositional thinking, but I throw it in just to highlight the notion of resistance, and how resistance is a pre-experience phenomenon.

**JP:** I am not sure I understand what you mean?

**IUP:** I know it sounds obvious, but what I want to get to is that there can be resistance when the breaking with signs of power doesn’t take on a form that has the coding of opposition. Massumi talks about a dance performance that he had worked on and that was criticized for being politically bankrupt because it had no ”real” interaction, because it didn’t attempt to network out of the confined space of the performance. Do you agree with him when he says that such a critique misses the point?

**JP:** Yes, I do. It is a critique that claims that what’s in the frame of the space is “reducible to the actual spatial parameters, and anything that appears within that frame has no relation to anything outside.” And in his continued reasoning, if I remember correctly, he formulates a thought that I think mirrors the idea I presented as underlying my ambition around the construction of *John and the Mushrooms*, which was to construct the performance in a way that opens up for an understanding that what is being built – the performance – is a construction that can be rebuilt, in a different way. Massumi suggests, why not “accept for a moment the constraints that the artist carefully built in, and see what you can feel with them? It may turn out to be autonomous in the way I redefined it – in a relation-of-nonrelation with other formations that might analogically “want” it and be able to capture and reframe it, so that it expands or contrasts to fit other spaces and takes off from other conditions, where its effect could well be political” (Massumi 2011, 79). He’s saying that autonomy does not have to mean that the expression is closed to the dynamics surrounding it, that it is unpolitical, but that it can, depending on how it is built, be both. If I connect this further to the performance of *John and the Mushrooms*, I thought of it as a sensuous-philosophical event in so far as it is an esthetic formation interested in generating questions. And it is an ethico-esthetic event in so far as it aims at generating a thought-felt experience of becoming. And, it is an esthetico-political event in so far as it aims to counteract fixed notions of how the world can be built. All those movements are not only “reducible to the actual spatial parameters,” but to the inner world of the individual. I’d like to think that to assign great value to those ineffable movements is a way to resist being subsumed by a capitalist economy. When an economy “subsumes all other economies, it is not just capturing monetary value. It is capturing processes of individuation. It is capturing entire fields of emergent relation. It is capturing powers of becoming … It subsumes them, sometimes gently, more often brutally, to techniques of relation dedicated to quantitative value-adding and accumulation” (Massumi and Manning 2014, 122).

**IUP:** I can envision how the notion of difference is captured by the same force, and before we move on to a question that takes us in a different direction, I would like you to briefly say something about that, how the concept of difference can be thought of from an ethical-compositional perspective. When Claire Colebrook says that in order to produce an event within capitalism “we need to do more than point out its unfairness, its contradictions and its biases. We need to think difference differently.” What are your thoughts on that? Colebrook 2002, 49).

**JP:** Oh, Deleuze wrote a whole book on difference, and the concept is, to say the least, absolutely central to his thinking, and I cannot possibly encompass all its philosophical implications. But, with that said, the passage that you are quoting is an example of how Colebrook manages to inspirationally compress Deluezian thinking into formulations that actually, in my eyes, float right into esthetic and dramaturgical thinking. So, even if there is a complex Deleuzian reasoning behind it, we could just ask, from the position of the theater worker; what are the repercussions of letting it guide how and what we do? After the initial observation that theater is captured by capitalism and made into a spectacle – to allude to the unavoidable Guy Debord, who’s *Society of the Spectacle* lurks underneath all this – it asserts that a critique of this same system cannot rely on an existing language. It becomes disqualified, useless, as it has been subsumed by a capitalist system that has “mastered difference directly by managing it economically” (Colebrook 2002, 49).

**IUP:** And to “think difference differently,” which is needed in order to escape this condition, how can that be thought of. It seems to suggest a movement.

**JP:** That’s how I also see it, that one should understand difference as untamable, that difference is never steady, that difference continuously produces new difference. The esthetic transference of this outlook, its repercussions, would be, firstly, that instead of producing representations of already established differences, rendering unfairness with a language infected by the coding that the capitalist system has given it, we need to elaborate with components and structures that have a semiotic fluency. Secondly, I think it’s possible on a performative level to appropriate this untamablility in such a way that even the smallest component is allowed to carry, and radiate, an uncertainty, a doubleness, an instability. The expression, at the same time as it is One, is also another One, and another One. In my imagination this second level of a possible application, or critical transference, opens up for infusing fluency into material that is steady, too steady. From a directorial point of view, it’s a perspective that offers truly interesting possibilities.  

**IUP:** I am tempted to ask what that really means, more concretely, but if you don’t mind, I would like to continue with a question that leads us into a different area of your work. There was a suggestion from one of the collaborators here at the institute to have a seminar about making theater for young audiences and you were asked to organize it, but it didn’t happen. You seemed reluctant, no? That surprises me, since you have worked with it so much, and written about it. What is this hesitation all about?

**JP:** The director Suzanne Osten starts one of her articles with saying that “If I don’t want anybody to read this contribution I should put the word child somewhere in the title” (Osten 2002, 146). That is sad, but true. The perspective of the child does not have any significant status within esthetic theory, if it’s not taken up and treated in contexts where it’s expected, where it is “suppose” to be. It is as if the discussion around the child in society – and in the arts – has to stay within certain areas and limits. It’s possible to discuss pedagogy, media habits, childcare, to discuss the quality of their schooling, and other aspects concerning how children are controlled or taught, but a structural analysis of the society as a whole that’s *grounded on the perspective of the child*, is overlooked and not allowed to have any real impact. Likewise, a more advanced discussion about esthetics and its relation to young human beings, I mean a discussion that goes *beyond* the demarcations that rule existing ideas of how esthetics and age are related, are very rare.

**IUP:** Are you saying that your hesitation to talk about your work with making theater for young audiences has to do with this low status?

**JP:** No, that’s not the cause of my hesitation. I would say that there are two other reasons. The first is that a critical undertaking that aims at weaving together esthetics, power, and an outlook on the young members of our society, extends beyond what I am trying to work with at the moment. It is something that I do want to explore, but it needs to be given a separate focus, with other questions and references than those I have elaborated on. Just to give you an example, we could take the Deleuzian concept of minoration, which he uses in One Less Manifesto and inserts into his analysis of Carmelo Bene’s theater esthetics. It is a concept that in Deluzian thinking has philosophical, esthetic and political strands and is certainly interesting to activate when talking about theater art for young audiences. Partly because it is a relevant critical gaze but also because it infuses a temperature, an understanding of what’s at stake.

**IUP:** Why is that?

**JP:** Well, minor stands in opposition to major, and to minorate is to illuminate the mechanics of power and specifically the rule of doctrines. The repressive force of doctrines is generality and generality not only dismisses multiplicity but stymies difference. However, the formulation that encircles the critical workings of minoration in such a way that connects it to the critique of the institution and the power of representation, can be found in the text on Kafka where Deleuze and Guattari say that “minor no longer designates specific literatures but the revolutionary conditions for every literature within the heart of what is called great (or established) literature” (Deleuze and Guattari 2012, 39). So, to minorate is to challenge both the status of the material as well as the institution as Major.

**IUP:** The material being whatever is set in motion on stage, in the theater, and the institution refers to the theater itself, is that how you think?

**JP:** Yes. To minorate is dependent on a political gaze that grows from a view of the world outside the performance, outside the premises of the primary material and outside the composition. This political view is not just any, but one that acknowledges and creates an alliance with the minority. In the Deleuzian reasoning *minority* has two meanings, related but distinct. The first asserts that minority “ denotes a state of rule, that is to say, the situation of a group that, whatever its size, is excluded from majority, or even included, but as a subordinate fraction in relation to the standard of measure that regulates the law and establishes the majority. In this context, we can say that women, children, the South, the third world, etc., are still minorities, as numerous as they are” (Murray 1997, 255). This first meaning does not imply any motion; it’s an observation, an analysis. Though, it gives birth to the second meaning, which is a movement, towards reaching the “goal,” and a call for a continuous reevaluation, and must in its essence be considered ethical. It asserts that “minority no longer denotes a state of rule, but a becoming in which one enlists. To become-minority. This is a goal, a goal that concerns the entire world since the entire world is included in this goal and in this becoming inasmuch as everyone creates his or her variation of the unity of despotic measure and escapes, from one side or the other, from the system of power that is a part of the majority” (Murray 1997, 255). The unavoidable challenge inherent in this observation is to approach the task of how to precisely construct the formal structure of the performative event – and the shaping of all its components – so that it not only mirrors but creates an experience of such an outlook on the world.

**IUP:** What are the possible concrete measures that could be considered in such an undertaking? Are there any such measures that can be formulated in a more general way, without attaching them to a specific material, to a specific compositional intention?

**JP:** Initially, one could claim that no such undertaking is possible if the artistic activity does not involve a process of placing it within, and relating it to, a political analysis in conjunction to a pre-developed idea of the relation between this analysis and esthetic choices. Secondly, one could argue that minoration entails an increased awareness of which semiotic systems are being used and if – and how – it is codified in such a way that pre-knowledge is needed, in other words functioning as an excluding factor. However, these are just two aspects – brought forth by problematizing just this one concept – that points to what I said a few minutes ago, that an investigation into the workings of esthetics, power and young people, needs to be given a separate focus and expanded references.  

**IUP:** I hope this is something that we here at the institute can work on together. What’s the other reason for your hesitation to instigate the seminar?

**JP:** The second reason is that the discussions and investigations that I have tried to develop are about esthetics, ethics, collaborative creative work, the production of meaning, dramaturgy and composition. And, in that investigation I don’t think it’s relevant to rely on some undefined idea about human age and its influence on the issues. It’s not necessary for the problematizations. Making such a distinction would actually, in my eyes, fortify an approach to art for young people that I don’t want to contribute to.

**IUP:** And what is that approach?

**JP:** It’s an approach based on generalizations about the affective effect of art perception, about what type of esthetics that “work”, or whatever word we want to use, for a certain age group. The experiential values in such thinking do not ensue from the actual experience but from preconceived notions, and as such they avoid diversity and uncertainty, and they exude an almost instrumentalist desire to be affect-effective. There are not many things that I can say I really know about how art is experienced but I *do* know that an interest in and an appreciation of for example the music by Karlheinz Stockhausen or the poetry by Lorine Niedecker, has nothing to do with age. We paste our own limitations onto children. Our own blockages that inhibit us to be playful and imaginative are then converted into ideas about what “works,” what’s “reasonable,” what’s “relevant.”

**IUP:** You make it sound like an unavoidable chain of repression. Where do we end up, if not each relation, let’s say between parent and child, is regarded as a fundamental possibility? Just a minute ago you talked about your art as affirmative projects placing positivity and vitality in the foreground.

**JP:** If you think this is a contradiction, I can only say that I don’t see it like that. The tension between the observation that we transfer our limitations to the children, which is a broad cultural-political one, and my formulations around my esthetic intention, actually constitute the frictional domain in which I think most art is made.

**IUP:** So what you are saying, going back to your example with Stockhausen and Niedecker, is that there are no limits for what a young audience can appreciate, or experience as exciting, or enriching, or whatever word you want to use?

**JP:** What I am saying is that a serious investigation of dramaturgical or directorial problems should not be divided along a line defined by some unchallenged assumptions about a correlation between less life experience and esthetic preferences, hence indicating that the real heavy duty questions are only to be found when working with an adult audience in mind, and then more light weight when making theater for an all-age audience. I actually think it’s the opposite, that there is a demand for clarity and communicative mastery when meeting the latter. Obviously, that doesn’t mean that there aren’t subject matters or themes that a human being with limited life experience can’t relate to or comprehend.

**IUP:** So, what is this required clarity about?

**JP:** I could choose from quite a few different experiences and examples that point towards the same dynamic, but one that brought the aspect of clarity to the forefront was when I worked with a theater production together with the company Unga Klara called *Baby Drama*, directed by the companies founder and artistic director Suzanne Osten. It was created for an audience aged 4-12 months old, and I wrote the music and worked as music dramaturge.

**IUP:** A pre-verbal audience in, I assume, the company of caretakers, seems like very special circumstance.

**JP:** Yes, there are numerous interesting aspects to this work, seen from a dramaturgical point of view, but I will take up just a few that relate to the broader picture that I have been trying to outline. Since the use and understanding of verbal language had not yet developed in the young audience, *understanding* as a concept was devoid. The power and impact of the present moment was everything. The polarity between the nonsensuous and the sensuous that I took up in my paper *The Rhythm of Thinking*, and in connection with Brian Massumi’s term *amodal*, could not be thought of as a polarity (Massumi 2011).  Everything – semantic language, movements, different practicalities – had to be conceived of as being in one mode, purely sensuous.  

**IUP:** And this, I can clearly see, points to the significance of the non-semantic and the shaping of the intensities, and their rhythmical relation.

**JP:** Exactly, the mechanisms that governed the barter between stage and audience, was all about rhythm and shifts and changes in rhythm. The performance had a distinctly dialogic quality, and there were sharp variations between different rhythmic structures.
It was clear how the audience changed its focus in connection with rhythmic shifts, and I understood that there was a strong link between rhythmic variation and vitality and the degree of focus and attention exerted by the audience. For me, the most important insights that came out of this experience, moving down to such a fundamental level of theatrical communication, is that the message that the director and actors have decided to express finds it clarity when it is transformed into rhythmic energy, when the importance of duration is considered. Then the notion of understanding can move down to a deeper level.

**IUP:** We don’t have much time but could you give an example of how these experiences took off, left traces in other performances?

**JP:** Not so long after working with *Baby Drama*, I directed a performance with texts by Gertrude Stein for a young audience.

**IUP:** Her work is considered quite complex, also by more experienced readers.

**JP:** Maybe. I can’t go into describing that performance in detail, and you *really* need to look at the specifics of the language structure, but it is a good example of how a dedicated focus on embodiment and rhythm can untangle, I would almost say unlock, language structures that might seem impermeable. But I also saw how important it is that such a focus isn’t just about grounding the material in the body and creating cool rhythms, or something like that, which one could say is what actors and directors do all the time, but that the process of embodying and rhythmization are thought of as investigative tools, continually throughout the actual performing. I think that’s what created the clarity in that performance, and it was probably the reason why many grown ups in the audience said that it was the first time they understood Stein.

**IUP:** Those aspects are part of a detailed and concrete performative level. But if, to round this off, we return to an esthetic-philosophical approach, I would say that it is far more common for theater to partake in political discussions than engage in philosophical problems. Now, you seem to insist on a dependency between the two areas.

**JP:** I am not sure it’s necessary to think about it as if I am engaging in philosophical problems, and I don’t think I would talk about it as a dependency. The type of work and the type of intellectual methods I understand as the practice of philosophy finds its stability and line of reasoning by following and developing inter-philosophical connections. What I do is more of an attempt to find embodied prolongations of some, quite restrained, philosophical outlooks.

**IUP:** Laura Cull asks if “immanent theatre really [is] ‘good’ theatre or is this to conflate philosophical, ethical and aesthetic value in a problematic fashion?” (Cull 2012, 220),

**JP:** I would say that it is not problematic, in a negative sense, as such conflations generate creative and constructive openings for problematizing dramaturgy, *but* it is a question that very soon becomes obsolete since it does not approach the actual experience. It does not problematize the relationship between the specifics of the expression and the affect. I know that the work by for example Laura Cull, strongly contributes to inspire practitioners in ways to think, to carve out a useful language, and this exchange between approaches does takes us forward, I hope.

**IUP:** Your seminar on the text *The Rhythm of Thinking* did help me to see more clearly where this urgency that I so often have felt in our discussions comes from, but it also, as our conversation today has shown, caused a lot of questions and I was surprised that you didn’t give your paper more of a conclusive character.

**JP:** What is your question?

**IUP:** What can you conclude from your research? Do you see that as an irrelevant, maybe provocative question?

**JP:** No, I don’t. However, I don’t think we need to go into the charged discussion of what type of conclusions artistic research should or can produce, I mean on a broader level, outside the specificity of my own work, which is somewhat what your question implies. But conclusions, well, I have a friend who says, when I complain about how the perpetuance of my thinking makes it hard for me to come to a conclusion, “just don’t think about it, just pull the horn out of your mouth.” I think it’s a quote that comes from Miles talking to Coltrane who said that he didn’t know how to end his solos. Anyway, I actually think there is too much conclusiveness in my reasoning already. Nothing in this can be considered stable. They are experiments, both the performances and my research reflections. And the fact that our conversations have a searching quality – at least for me – is more in line with the modality that I want to sustain in what I do and say.

**IUP:** It might be so that your work will be seen as irrelevant if put into the realm of theater as it is thought of today, that the consequences of your thinking about dramaturgy and theatrical composition carries the possibility – or risk – of dissolving the borders of theater as idiomatically defined through history.

**JP:** For me this attempt to problematize, in dramaturgical terms, the relation between components and energies that make up a performance and aspects like ethics and politics, yes, the relation between the structural specifics and their socio-ethico-political intention, is a beginning. I have, quite tightly, attached my reasoning to the performances that I have made, and tied more or less every thought to the conceptual specifics of those three performances. The reasoning and the references go very much hand in hand, and the consequence is that the material, the conceptual set-up and the collaborative processes, don’t really offer any strong resistance. What I am interested in is investigating what parts, which aspects of these dramaturgical and directorial thoughts can be used when approaching totally different kinds of materials. How a processual type of thinking can be placed within materials of a more set character. Then the dramaturgical thinking has to be transposed into different solutions in order to enable, for example, the experience of co-composition, or a sense of becoming. I imagine it as being something that happens further down, more of adjusting, adding, reshuffling, configuring on a very intricate level of directing. It would not be interesting to me, actually kind of a failure, if what I describe as the reciprocal relation between dramaturgical and formal aspects and esthetic-ethico-political intensions was not transferable to let’s say, a narrative and dramatic progression of a so-called realistic kind.

**IUP:** And those possible transformations are what you were thinking of when you earlier talked about the operational systematization that the reasoning implies, and that they are carried out as a way to enable transformations?

**JP:** Yes, into new compositions. There is a quite well known quote by Deleueze saying that “To think is to create – there is no other creation – but to create is first of all to engender ‘thinking’ in thought” (Deleuze 1994, 147). I would like to boil that down and suggest that thinking can only happen in composition.
