**IUP:** First I want to say that I am glad that we have gotten this opportunity to meet again. I have spent some time reading your text more closely and quite a few questions have come up, especially regarding the structure of the text, which I was hoping we could discuss.

**JP:** And which text are you talking about?

**IUP:** Your work *The Rhythm of Thinking: Immanence and Ethics in Theater Performance*. Don’t misunderstand this, but it seems like the work generates a kind of flatness. It is not a question of the absence of distinctive assertions or a lack of thorough and interesting thought lines, but instead that there are so many of them. Of course, one can say that this is concurrent with the theme of multiplicity and overload, two terms that are central in your reasoning, but in my reading I didn’t feel satisfied with that answer as it didn’t really eliminate the very simple fact that the many different critical focuses you present make it difficult to navigate, and to follow you to some kind of conclusion.

**JP:** I can certainly understand where that criticism comes from, and while I was working with the project I too felt, at times, that it was a challenge to make constructive demarcations and find concentration in the reasoning. When I sensed that, I had to go back and ask myself: What kind of work is this? What is its relationship to my art practice? What do I want that relationship to be? What can it be? My artistic work is like a cluster of thoughts and investigative strands, and it is combined with the dynamics of working collectively, so it really is a mixture of aspects. In the playing out of this mixture the connections are sometimes hidden and understanding pops up unexpectedly. Early on, I understood that if I did not let this multitude color the critical research it would become an attempt to render and organize a process in such a way that it loses its processuality.  

**IUP:** Hearing you say that, I wonder if it could be that the structure of your research investigation is an outcome of the more or less intuitive type of thought processes that you engage in when making theater?

**JP:** Yes, initially I guess it’s possible to put it that way. But then, getting deeper into the research, it became clear to me that there is a correlation between the critical outlook in the references I have chosen to work with and the structure of my research exploration. And also, that there is a correspondence between the esthetics of the performances that I critically treat, and the dispersed and multifaceted critique that I present.

**IUP:** But is it necessarily so that a multitude of critical approaches must create a sense of lack of order?

**JP:** It’s unfortunate if you sense that there is a lack of order in what I present, a lack that prevents you from reaching an understanding of what I am trying to convey. Could it be that it mirrors your expectations of what order is? The only way that I can meet such a criticism is to try to clarify how I see it.

**IUP:** And how is that?

**JP:** Well, the question of order, or *reason in the reasoning*, should be approached and problematized in relation to the process ontology in which I place my reasoning, or that I use as a foundation, you might say. If that is done I think it’s possible to see this question of navigating and understanding in a different light.

**IUP:** Meaning that you see a process ontology not as a purely philosophical discourse but extended into the realms of comprehension and understanding?

**JP:** Yes I do, because adhering to a process ontology effects and alters accepted and established methodologies, methodologies that are delineated by the idea of a rational individual consciousness moving along a linear and progressive temporal line. Following a contemporary discussion and exploration of nomadism, a process ontological outlook on knowledge production means the rejection of the idea of the subject as a self-regulating rationalist entity and of the traditional image of thought and the scientific practices that rest upon it. That traditional image of a rational reasoning, like a sequence of steady accumulation of insights, is neither concurrent with the overarching perceptive intention of the performances or with how my investigative critique is structured. Both these levels have to be met with a co-compositional approach.

**IUP:** If I want to be provocative I would say that it sounds a bit like you are trying to fit your reasoning into an interpretative matrix just to cover up its insufficiency.

**JP:** If that’s a question I’ll answer it by trying to explain how I see the correspondence between my critical outlook and what I am problematizing, how derives from the nature of the objects studied and also of the objectives of the investigation, and how these different layers, separately, relate to the question of order. That will hopefully make clear that the link between the nature of the critique and the nature of my artistic practice is quite intimate.

**IUP:** My initial question had to do with the aspect of navigating through the reasoning, it had to do with the actual comprehension of the thought lines that you present, and not about the artistic expression. I can certainly understand that the relation between the objects of investigation and the critical treatment inevitably becomes very tight, but are you not, in an unnecessary way, confusing the borders of the creative processes that you are looking at and the critical extrapolations by trying to transfer structural specifics that initially have an esthetic purpose into a form that’s about critique and not about a sensual experience, which your art obviously aims at?

**JP:** I hear what you are saying, but I don’t see how those two aspects can be separated. The relation between the practice and the production of critique within artistic research has to be seen as reaching down to structural levels. Let me try to explain why by looking at the different layers I mentioned. The structure of the performances is one of multiplicity, of superimpositions, and I talk about the collective creation as emerging in a mode of immanence. When that creative mode is transferred, which is what I try to explicate in my reasoning, to the exchange between the expression and the spectator I insert the concept of co-composition to indicate that the meaning is dependent on an active co-creative investment of the spectator. These are the areas I look at – the objects studied – and they are open and process oriented situations, and in neither of those areas does understanding or comprehension, as you named it, grow along a mono-linear timeline.

**IUP:** And if you try to make that a bit more concrete, what can you say about the actual relation between the co-compositional investment that you talk about, and the creative and performative situation?

**JP:** Imagine that there is a group of performers. Through experimentation, improvisation and invention they create an expression that they present. The individual, among the performers as well as in the audience, moves through this with her own thoughts and his own understanding of what’s going on. In a performative situation dominated by multiple expressive trajectories and superimpositions, it cannot be in any other way. It is inevitable that understanding and insights will come not only when you expect it, but in unexpected spurs, unexpected moments, and also slowly. The shared unfolding of the event means that the consciousness is collectively distributed, but understanding is diversified and dispersed. The next layer is my critical attempt, the actual making of the critique, in which I try to carve out possibilities for thinking around the relationship between these processes and some specific aspect, like creative hierarchy, the production of meaning and ethics. So my investigative attempt is also an experiment of sorts, it’s filled with questions and the aspects that I problematize interfere with and sometimes contradict each other. This means that my own understanding evolves through a creative thinking-writing process that moves in different directions producing folds of thoughts. What I want to suggest, in answer to your criticism, is that the need to activate a co-creative approach for reaching an understanding is grounded already in the structure of the material that is performed, that it is affirmative of the open and unregulated process in which the performative expression is shaped and it is concurrent with the objectives of the investigation.

**IUP:** How do you see that your investigative procedure relates to the notion of epistemology as the elucidation of answers to the questions that are treated? Now you indicate that navigating through your work should be seen as a process similar to the processes of the creative doings that are looked at, and that the knowledge, if that’s what we want to call it, is dependent on some kind of reader strategy. What I really wonder, how do you describe the epistemological conditions for extracting some knowledge out of such a multifocused and open reasoning?

**JP:** I don’t see my writing as a puzzle, and I haven’t thought about it as some kind of riddle that I hand over. I aim at developing understandable connections, but I also allow strands of thoughts and questions to exist even if they’re not thoroughly developed. I see them as an outcome of submitting to the process ontology in which I ground my reasoning, and therefore they should not be contained. What I am trying to say is that the notion of epistemology, as we usually understand that concept, has to be reconfigured. I want to exemplify this by referring to my introduction in which I outline that the momentum behind my critical extrapolations are those fields of tension that occur when delineating, and critically merging, different compounds of energy. These compounds – intentions, expectations, desires – are defined by me in order to create a structure of reasoning, but then when this is met by you, by the reader, there are additional expectations and desires which, roughly speaking, can be said to create new fields of tension that occur between what I present and your understanding of it. So these fields move and change, they cannot just be dealt with and then its done, they never stop exuding interesting problems. I mean, like now, you present to me some criticism that directly relates to a troublesome experience that can be used in the thinking. The methodology produces, which is what you experience as problematic, a conceptual apparatus that indicates many complex critical areas. Some of those get more attention, others less, but they are all necessary for the reasoning to flow. To place this complexity at the center of epistemic structure is, as you said, to confirm and assign importance to strategies of the subject, strategies I see as individualized and creative.

**IUP:** Does that mean that you are downplaying the need for stability, or effacing the demand that the investigative questions should be followed through?

**JP:** I would say the opposite. I try to get very deep into the intricacy of a creative and perceptive dynamic, I problematize it in many different ways and with different approaches. And as the problematizations are searching for an openness and formed in an investigative-speculative mode, I actually think there is a need for multidimensional approaches and multiple entrance points. The consistency, what you call stability, in the reasoning can be found in accepting and using this multiplicity. The multitude only becomes insufficient if met with reaction and not action. To make this a bit more clear it’s possible to connect it to the claim I make that the dramaturgical structures of the performances carry a vision of the subject. This vision is not spelled out as a proclamation but inherent in an idea about how the individual perceiving subject can move and co-compose. The way Rosi Braidotti sees the subject within such a process oriented movement – and in search of an understanding – is that she needs to “enlist the creative resources of the imagination to the task of enacting transformative relations and actions in the present” (Braidotti 2011, 210). When we allow ourselves to place importance on the notion of imagination, a word that strangely enough very rarely appears in critical discussions around the relationship between esthetics and perceptive potentiality, there is an opening for an epistemological reconfiguration. Imagination is what enables us to reach beyond the known and there is no hesitance to assign importance to its capacity when talking about creative doings, but what is crucial is to place it in a discussion on knowledge production so that it merges the experience of a complex multiplicity with epistemology.

**IUP:** So, are you suggesting that if the reader experiences difficulties with grasping your main focus it’s because he or she isn’t imaginative enough?

**JP:** What I am saying is that the identity of my work cannot be found in existing categories – which of course is a contradiction, since on some formal levels it can – but putting it like that has to be understood as an encouragement to view and use it on its own terms, and to engage in the task of enacting transformative relations. The imagination creates connections and those connections exclude other connections, which means that our imagination creates what it creates through a self-directed attention, and in that dynamic the multitude of critical approaches is a resource, an opening.

**IUP:** What do you say to somebody who claims that you, by formulating it the way you do, make it quite impossible to find ways to criticize your work? That you kind of encapsulate it by suggesting that any disagreement or difficulty should be assigned to the readers incapability.

**JP:** I don’t agree. There are gaps and instabilities in what I do, both because I want it to be so but probably also because thought lines are extrapolated in a way that can be criticized for a kind of distortion. You can also criticize, and maybe dismiss, my reasoning on more general grounds, like for example not aligning oneself with a process ontological outlook on things. I want to listen to that and try to use it, but when I turn back to the nature of my practice and to the questions that I have placed in the midst of it, I choose to see criticism as new material for critical extensions that I haven’t made room for. I have to rest in the belief that what could be experienced as critical insufficiency actually has to be there, and that it can be seen as a catalyst, for the reader as well as for myself.

**IUP:** Another question that came up during my reading, was about how the performances that you refer to and the research relate in time. You don’t really clarify if the performances were created within the research, like an outcome of what you want to investigate or, if it’s the other way around, that you’re applying your critique to phenomena that would have been the same regardless of the research.

**JP:** The short answer would be that none of the performances would have been radically different if they weren’t objects of my research. My interest in experimenting with the type of structures that they rely on and to performatively problematize collective creative processes has been present in my work for a long time. But, and this is an important, since both the performance of *John and the Mushrooms* and *Ryoanji – A Meeting* were made during a time when I was intensely engaged in developing the questions that I wanted my research to evolve around, there is a reciprocity between my investigative focus and different structural aspects of how they were conceptualized. Then, of course, there is the obvious fact that the voices of the performers are present in my text. The performance of *vorschläge* on the other hand was made before I entered into academically formalized research, but I think the fact that that performance connects so strongly to, almost prepares for the themes and questions that I treat, points directly to how my research grows from my practice.

**IUP:** Who, in this multitude of critical approaches, do you envision as a reader? Who do you see as the recipient of this work?

**JP:** I think that question can be approached from the perspective of artistic research in general and what we should expect it to contribute, as well as from a more personal point of view. Efva Lilja points out, in her overview of artistic research, how written reflections must be seen as the necessary process of documentation within the research activity. To document is to further the development of the project, of the thinking, and that is to implicitly place the researcher as the recipient (Lilja 2015). For me such a sequence directly relates to what I talk about as the writing-thinking process and as such it is kind of closed and contained, though very important. Then Lilja talks about the aspect of sharing and exchanging information with colleagues and I read that as being about contributing to the field of artistic research and to the discussions on methodologies and research strategies. My personal view and expectations, in answer to your question, is that what I write can be shared with other theater artists. It is not so much about connecting to artistic research but about giving something back to the field of theater art and to suggest how different critical approaches might create openings for how to compose.
