**IUP:** During our last seminar we discussed at length your paper The Pleasance of Uncertainty and the issue of creating expressions that you called unstable. And the question that kept coming up was about the relationship between the structure of a performance and how the individual in the audience process and shape the experience of it. I wonder if we could talk a bit more about that. What interest me is what you se as the repercussions of installing instability?

**JP:** I use the word unstable to describe a dramaturgical structure that is not only in “continuous variation” to use Deleuze’s wording, but in continuous contemplation. It is a performative figure that is not only concerned with creating an experiential milieu in which thoughts can wander, but also that the expression itself unfolds in a reflective mode. In the framework of my own performances the structure is unstable both because it has more than one desired direction to move in, but also because it’s multilayered and therefore escapes any attempt to assign any one discrete meaning, or story, if you like.

**IUP:** Would you say that your production *John and the Mushrooms* is an example of a performance that includes this structural element?

**JP:** Yes, the structure of *John and the Mushrooms* is a clear example. When we created that performance I knew that chance and indeterminacy had to be in there, in the structure, so of course I was aware of the instability caused by unpredictability that was at play. The compositional methods Cage used for the major part of his oeuvre was based on chance and I saw it as necessary to think the same way when making the performance. So the intent was partly to stay true and close to the methods and qualities of Cage’s own work, but also to create fertile ground for what I earlier described as a multilayered structure of expression; an expression where the individual in the audience has to choose his or her focus, his or her own path of attention.

**IUP:** Couldn’t that be criticized as a way to relinquish from making an artistic claim? This was voiced at the seminar and I think it’s an adequate question.

**JP:** No, I think it’s the opposite. When I created the piece, I nourished three parallel levels of expressional forces.  First: It is when the audience invests their attention in the expression of the performance that the performance comes into being. Second: It is by letting the actual structuring, the dramaturgical building of the performance become visible and be part of the theatrical gestalt that makes it possible to experience that something is being built anew. And thirdly: It is when meeting the unrecognizable recognizable that a shift can happen and a new understanding can occur.

**IUP:** Can you expand on that?

**JP:** Well, the first level is about an ambition to create a structure that I would like to call translucent. With that I mean a quality that equally encourages and demands not only an interpretation but also a type of co-creation of a possible – or needed – causality. The second level illuminates the theater as fictional, as a place where a “world” is built. This makes way for an understanding that what is being built – the performance – is a construction that can be rebuilt, in a different way. This notion, transferred into the world outside the theater, encourages one to question the world as “it is what it is.”  The third level is about encountering something never before experienced and that this encounter carries the potential for displacement and change.

**IUP:** I can see the ambition to generate a reaction, or rather a loop of activity, and that is surely not unusual. But in this case, when you use the words displacement and change, the question is: displacement of what, and what change and why? Or is there no why?

**JP:** There is absolutely a why. When I create a performance, like *John and the Mushrooms*, there are many different energies that drive the work forward, ranging from rigorous planning in my own studio to intuitive decisions taken during rehearsals. In the beginning I have an idea about what the performance should attempt to offer its audience. I have thoughts and emotions around the material, around the texts and the music. All this, combined with the complexity of the collective creative process, creates confusion that in order to be made sense of has to include an answer to why. And this why refers, firstly, to performer questions like: Why am I saying this? What is it my character wants to accomplish? What does all this mean? But then when we get back to the question concerning expressive instability, we meet a reflective activity somewhat removed from the artistic practice.

**IUP:** Removed from the artistic practice, those words surprise me. What’s your distinction here, can reflections be more or less removed from the object of reflection?

**JP:** Sometimes in theater practice we talk about our *reading* of the text, indicating that we make specific choices in the process of interpretation that we then use as a decisive factor in the shaping of the theatrical expression. This is an activity that moves along hermeneutical paths. Parallel to the formulations that this interpretative activity establishes, there is a need for the theater artist to define: Why the heck are we putting this out into the world? and What do we want it to contribute? Answering these questions creates the discourse of the theater performance. The why that concerns the unstable area belongs to this latter level, the chosen *political* intention of the performance.

**IUP:** So, there is a political aspect, or intention, to instability?

**JP:** Yes, it has to do with multitude, with creating an expression beyond the expected and beyond established values. And for me the most explicit political aspect of expressive instability is that it allows for the new, a meeting with the never-before-experienced. Cage once said that from ”what we already know, comes no change. From what we for example know as beauty comes nothing new, comes no change” (Retallack 1996, 69).  It is this aspect - encountering something never before experienced – that has led me to some questions on how three specific phenomena might relate to each other in a theater performance, or rather how they relate to each other when perceived by the audience.

**IUP:** And what are those phenomena?

**JP:** The Structure, the Never-Before-Experienced and the Thinking.

**IUP:** In relation to each other, or in relation to the audience, or both? You said, “coming together in the viewer.” That sounds like an attempt to reflect on an individual experience, which inevitably is hidden.

**JP:** Yes, that’s right. I am interested in exploring if it is possible to reflect on what the theater performance does to the *inner world* of the audience. More specifically how it moves the *thinking* of the people in the audience.

**IUP:** An analytical approach formulated in that way indicates that you want to apply an instrumental conditioning to art and art making. Doesn’t that contradict what you have formulated as your “interest in the spiritual condition” of art?

**JP:** For me the spiritual condition is embedded in what I, inspired by Brian Massumi, call the possibility of self-creation (Massumi 2011). The reason I want to pose the question about what happens in the audience when experiencing the theatrical gestalt and the theatrical situation, is because I want to test whether the intention to create certain reactions and activities in the audience can be described in ethical terms? The theater performances that I create strive, to a very high degree, towards generating non-recognizable experiences. I can even go so far as to say that the incentive for my artistic activities is to investigate things I do not know and to present something that has never before have been made.  This is about the importance of process and openness to what is not yet known; it is about relations and it’s about counteracting generalizations. All this relates to the question of ethics.

**IUP:** In earlier texts, and from other performances that I have seen, I clearly read an intension to politicize artistic forms and expressions that are not immediately seen as political. Now, when you mention the relationship between art and ethics as being an important aspect of your work, isn’t that a discourse impossible to avoid at the moment, it seems to be link many artist are making. Could that be interpreted as a desire to reach below or beyond the language of ideologies?   

**JP:** Theater art – not only in Sweden –relies on the semantic level of language. With that I mean that the main tool the theater uses to comment and interact with what’s happening in our society, and the way it expresses its desire for change, is through spoken language. It trusts, to such a high degree, the impact of the spoken word that it has shown very little interest in the intense critical dialogue that other art forms have engaged in since the beginning of modernism, regarding the relationship between form and meaning, like for example in the visual arts and performance art. The ethical discussions and general stance of the theater has, as a result of this, been played out solely in spoken language, resulting in sometimes almost comical discrepancies between what the text conveys and how it is presented: an engagement in change, of norms, of society, placed in conservative and uncontested theatrical formats. I think that most of my work is about bridging this gap, trying to create performances that in their formal qualities truly correspond to the quality and intent of the material. It’s like when Brian Massumi suggests that the “politicality of a pulse of process is the manner of potential it passes on for self-creative successor effect.”, thus an attempt to reach for an esthetics of a ethico-political nature (Massumi 2011, 13).

**IUP:** In view of Cage’s rather developed and extensive opinions about the placement and use of art in society, I can see how such an attempt corresponds on a theoretical level. However, I guess that when this view is applied to the work of Cage it must mean that there are quite many different, more concrete, aspects to take into account that the theater is unused to? You mentioned earlier the method of chance, for example. Could you point out any other level that you see as important?

**JP:** A very significant aspect of the work of John Cage is his problematization of communication as we use it in todays western culture. When Cage for example emphasizes the importance of asking questions rather than producing answers, he implicitly suggests that we should refrain from the idea that answers can change the world, or that my answer is the most relevant one. Communication should then be seen as setting questions in motion. Even if the concept of communication is at the core of a theater practice, it is rarely problematized within the performances. That is what I am interested in. I want to performatively problematize communication in such a way that its instability is illuminated, and hence offers multiple possibilities. This kind of double-edged expressive intention can be problematic for the performer since it can be confused with a self-reflective and self-critical meta level that can drains the expressive force. That’s why it not only has to be part of a collective consciousness but also considered in the conceptual set-up.

**IUP:** Let’s come back to what you earlier talked about as the *movement of the inner* world of the audience, and the question of ethics. Is that somehow connected to this criticism of communication?

**JP:** I don’t see that right now, but first let me point out that I don’t think I said movement of the inner world, but rather separately the *inner world* as a distinct subjective place and then movements in relation to the activity of thinking. It is in relation to the movement of thinking that I want to place the question of ethics.

**IUP:** Is this linked to your reading of Cage?

**JP:** Well, yes and no. I have come upon only one example where Cage himself mentions ethics and it does not include the aspect of thinking but it is an interesting little story as it connects to theater.  It occurred during a discussion that Cage was listening to, somewhere in upstate New York, where two well known American actors in a seemingly relaxed and open way talked about their work on *Hamlet*. Cage experienced the whole thing as very unstructured and sloppy and quote “totally disgusting.” The chairman of the meeting felt the same and, knowing that Cage was in the audience, he asked him to speak his mind. Cage then asked the actors what they thought of happenings as a form of performance, and discovered that they had no knowledge of them whatsoever. They were only concerned with the *Hamlet* situation. When Cage later commented on this event he said: ”He [Grizzard, one of the actors] kept being humble in order to show that he wasn’t so stuck up. But it was clear that he was as stuck on himself as he could be, and that he wanted the best thing to happen to him that would happen. He thought it was nice and ethical of him to have preferred to do Hamlet instead of something on Broadway. That kind of shoddy ethic is just intolerable” (Kostelanetz, 1987).The concept of happenings, at that time, stood for something new. This aspect - encountering something never before experienced – is what leads me to the question if a theater performance can be referred to as more or less ethical dependent on what kind of thought processes it encourages. The question is partly inspired by Cage who talks about creating “experiences that contribute to changing us and, particularly, to changing our preconceptions” and this can only be accomplished, in his eyes, by creating expressions that have never before been experienced (Kostelanetz 1987, 214). One could say that Cage aims unremittingly to make new things and he does this with such concentration and devotion that it’s possible to see it as the fuel for everything he does. He wants to invent and yet you can’t invent something that’s already invented. He embraced the concept of experimentation with no fear of his music being rejected as not fully realized creations. He said that experimentation should be “ understood not as descriptive of an act to be later judged in terms of success and failure, but simply as of an act the outcome of which is unknown” (Cage 2009, 13).

**IUP:** And how do you relate these quotes to each other and how do you see that they connect to the question of thinking and ethics?   

**JP:** These quotes point to the idea that the quality of the art is immanent in the kind of reaction it causes in the viewer, they indicate the idea that art can – Cage would probably say should – take on the function to inspire change, maybe you could say growth. Here I see two things connected to the question of ethics. First, in the emphasis on experiencing something new and the kind of thought movement that that experience can possibly create. Facing, meeting, experiencing the never-before-experienced carries a possibility of new thoughts and those in turn can be an opening to understanding. Secondly, I see the ethical aspect in the notion that the structure of the performance should recognize the individuality of each person in the audience.

**IUP:** What do you mean?

**JP:** The theater situation is sometimes talked about as a place where the audience confronts itself as a collective and therefore it comes to signify an exemplary form of community. Jacques Rancière brings this up in his essay *The Emancipated Spectator* and comments on it when he says that it is “  clear that it means more. It signifies that ‘theater’ is an exemplary community form. It involves an idea of community as self-presence, in contrast to the distance of representation” (Rancière 2009, 5). Like Rancière I think the dilemma of repressive generalizations is inherent in this situation. If the expressive structure of the performance relies on established and accepted value systems – even if treated in a critical way – this, combined with the collective reactions from the community of the audience, limits the possibilities for a more individual interpretation.

**IUP:** When you say that, I come to think of Adorno who talked about artworks as bundles of indeterminate stimuli, in themselves beyond judgment; any claim to know is a projection (Adorno 1997).

**JP:** Yes, and even though this assertion, as we know, was made in the mode of monadic esthetics and therefore has been picked apart through recent esthetic theory as well as contested by the development of contemporary art itself, I think that it can – both in the context of my own project and in critical thinking – be used as a spring board and reference.  This is for two reasons. Firstly, because most art works are still made in the mode of monadic esthetics, and secondly, because it activates and problematizes the aspect of exchange between the art work and the viewer in a way that relates to the question of repressive generalizations.

**IUP:** Which brings us back to the aspect of ethics, no?

**JP:** Yes, because the way I choose to insert the question of ethics in my work focuses on the relationship between dramaturgical structure, the individual and the community. It draws on the ambition to recognize each person in the audience by creating expressive structures that carry the possibility of a truly personal interpretation beyond established codification and that allows the individual to engage in a “process of self-creation.” This is an expression I borrow from Brian Massumi who in his turn borrows it from Alfred Whitehead. Turning to Massumi is a way to establish an understanding of the individual capacity to be creative in the moment of perception. Masssumi frames the event so that it lies embedded in the microcosm of the movement of the present moment. The event is, as such, the moment of potential, it inherits the possibility of the thinking-feeling activity which is a process of becoming, a process towards self-creation. This notion of an unstoppable human activity that sets the objects in the world in motion towards semblance, is undeniably an unchallenged human resource. The activity of becoming lies in the creative act of applying the device by which the actual discontinuity between drops of experience is passed over. Or you could say molded together. This could be described as an interactivity that inserts a macro-continuity of what I earlier talked about as a “necessary causality.” The creative act of the individual in the audience, moving into the expression and engaging in the act of co-composing is enjoyed as an affirmation of the individual’s life capacity. A transformation takes place and such transformation includes the immediacy of self-enjoyment (Massumi, 2011).

**IUP:** I think about ethics as relational, as a dimension that becomes visible in our actions toward the world around us. So reflecting on the relation between ethics and esthetics in the building of a theatre performance, doesn’t it have to focus on the quality of all the different relationships involved in the process of making and presenting the performance?

**JP:** I too see ethics as a relational concept. Therefore it is important to understand about the discourse I am trying to sketch, that the ethical aspect of the structure of the performance can only be understood as an implicit quality. I talk about ethics within the theater performance only with the equation in mind that the relations are open and continuously have to be created, and that this in turn inspires a reevaluation of the relationships the individual spectator is engaged in, otherwise, outside the theater. So, this is also a transformation, a transformation of vitality and affect. There is a quote by Deleuze I’d like to bring up since it leads back to Massumi, but also forward as it talks about thinking as an activity that not necessarily molds, creates causality. It opens up for a deepening of the question of the relation between the never-before-experienced, the form of a theater performance and ethics. Deleuze says that thinking  “ is neither innate nor stirred by the reassuring familiarity of encounters with the known. It is an involuntary activity that takes place when the mind is provoked by an encounter with the unknown and the unpredictable” (Deleuze 1994, 139). The question of ethics becomes bare when this observation by Deluze is put next to the question if  “ the activity of thinking as such, the habit of examining and reflecting upon whatever happens to come to pass, regardless of specific content and quite independent of results, could this activity be of such a nature that it ‘conditions’ men against evil-doing?”  (Arendt 1971, 418). This last question is a quote from Hannah Arendt’s essay *Thinking and Moral Consideration* from 1971. It is quite extensive in its attempt to draw a picture of the meaning, role and function of thinking, and it develops reflections on evil and loss of thinking in relation to action and judging that she so sharply – and provocatively – spotlighted in her book *Eichmann in Jerusalem* (1964).

**IUP:** Cage, Deleuze and Hannah Arendt are rather strange bedfellows. What I mean is that the work of Arendt has deep and specific political and historical connotations, and it seems you leave that aspect out by creating this linkage, creating a drama that actually has its core somewhere else, outside the immediately political?	And also, if I remember correctly, Deleuze and Guattari in their last book *What is Philosophy*, quite explicitly reject the idea of philosophy as an activity that’s about reflection and judgment, saying that no “image of thought can be limited to a selection of calm determinations.” Shouldn’t we understand that as an objection to thinking as being about weighing alternatives?

**JP:** I think that Deleuze and Guattari make their objection to thinking as corrective, even more explicitly when, following Nietzsche, they say that “thought is creation, not a will to truth” (Deleuze, Guattari 1994, 54). So, no doubt, juxtaposing those two quotes, taken out of their context, could be seen as careless. But for me it’s a way to emphasize how serious it is, and the consequences it is possible to imagine if we leave out of the discussion the kind of negative impact it has if we refrain from contesting representative esthetics. In other words, I think one should dare to create this kind of dynamic in a world where most of the messages, images and expressions that we meet are aimed at sedating us rather than reminding us of our rich inner capacity. In my own attempts to reflect on the activity of thinking, the ethical aspect is more about relatedness, and infused with the idea that thinking is “like being-there with and for other entities, forces ” and that it “ cracks open the shield of tedium and predictability in which we wrap ourselves in order to get through the day” (Braidotti 2011, 360).
