**IUP**: I’d like to start with a question that came up last time we met but that we didn’t have time for, about the function of critical reflections. We both know that the founding of this institute is inspired by the idea of creating a forum for artists and theoreticians to jointly investigate the relationship between critical reflections and artistic practices, so I guess my question could seem obvious, but still, can you describe, from a distinctly personal view, how you see the relation between your critical activity and your practice as a director?

**JP**: That is a huge question, and I think it has to be divided into quite a few sub-questions. First, it is tremendously important to keep in mind throughout a discussion around this question, that I engage in critical thinking only in relation to my compositional thinking. That dynamic is what hopefully creates some interesting tension. I am not capable and not really interested in developing strains of thoughts that find their stability, or reason you might say, through relating to a purely inter-philosophical or an inter-critical sequence. It would just not have any bearing if I would sit here and try to develop something like an esthetic criticism disconnected from my esthetic experiences and intensions. It is all very concrete. The critical work is related to my art making and driven by my restlessness.

**IUP**: Restlessness? What do you mean?

**JP**: Very little light would fall on an art practice if not critically treated through discourses outside its own domain and this notion is more or less automatically inserted as a basic methodological approach in artistic research. How that is done and with what kind of efficiency is another story, which we might want to come back to. Anyway, I too utilize a variety of critical sources in my attempt to carve out observations and extensions from my practice. But that is not a stance or an attitude, or whatever you want to call it, that I started to apply in correlation with the academic formalization that I have been subsumed by. It’s been there for a long time, right at the core of my art making, as an interest for deepening my understanding around what I am doing, and why and how. Of course it has developed, become more insightful and complex over the years, but I still think it is driven by a restless desire to move beyond my limitations. I am sometimes burdened by a stubborn staleness and it’s not something that I feel is useful in any way. On the contrary, the movement towards something that surprises me and towards the sense that something rich is happening in the art I make, is almost always dependent on my capability of letting go. But to approach your question a bit more systematically, in order to try to disentangle all the different angles, we might start by looking at the relationship between theory and practice, on a more general level. It certainly is a polarity that’s been pivotal in the history of philosophy and its many extensions.

**IUP**: But is it really necessary, I mean in this context when talking about your own art practice and how you relate to and problematize it through esthetic criticism and philosophical discourses of different kinds, to go back in time? First of all, you said earlier that you are not concerned with a purely inter-philosophical reasoning, and secondly I would suggest that if one takes the comment by Gilles Deleuze on the possibility of “doing” philosophy in a non-canonic way, as inspiration to a more free attitude, why not move straight into the tensions occurring right there and then, in the making of theatre?

**JP**: I’m not sure Deleuze ever formulated himself in that way, and he certainly was connected to the history of philosophy. He did however emphasize the importance of invention, of creating new concepts and new ways of looking at things, as central to the “doing” of philosophy, and I guess that could be used as a somewhat flaky impetus for what you are suggesting. Though, a possible entrance point for extrapolating on the relation between theory and practice, that to some extent evades the huge philosophical-historical dimension, is offered by Deleuze in a conversation with Foucault in 1972. He suggests that there is a new type of relationship forming between theory and practice that rejects what he describes as something I would call the paradigm of totalization. He reasons that through time, and through the history of philosophy, practice has been considered an application of theory *or* the other way around, practice was thought to inspire theory. Either way, he says that the “relationship was understood in terms of a process of totalization,” and we cannot continue to think this way. The critical application of theory cannot be driven by an affirmative intention, where the thinking so to speak falls into place when proven by the practice. Such reciprocity represses difference, and it represents an idea that obstacles, of any kind, are signs of failure in the theory or in the practice. Instead there has to evolve an acceptance for theory to be more partial, operating on and relating to limited fields, kind of like micro-sections. And all these sections, looked at through the critical attempt, do not connect, or connection should not be looked for. There is a multiplicity of areas of conflict that should be acknowledged and examined separately. They are in conflict, they obstruct each other, and there are obstacles within as well as between them. This whole dynamic is what theory has to live with, make use of, accept, not work against. From my perspective this thinking sets off contradictory observations. On the one hand, the building of an expression, even those that I construct with the intent to interfere with the tendency to experience something like a “whole,” or a narrative of some kind, they too strive towards merging a theoretical, philosophical thinking with a compositional one. You could say that there is an attempt to mirror the two, and this is a sort of totalization, or an attempt at least. Though, at the same time I see how my theoretical focus is divided into specific and seemingly unrelated areas, and those create discrete fields of theory that I have to look at separately, as well as try to stay in their inherent intensity.

**IUP**: Tell me if I am wrong, but I hear a tone of self-criticism in your observation that this ambition to merge the theoretical reasoning with a compositional construct somehow resembles the dynamic of totalization. Do you feel that you are making some kind of compromise?

**JP**: No, actually not. But I think what you sense is my frustration that comes from being in the midst of all the many unruly factors and unavoidable circumstances tied to the making of art, perhaps even more so in collective theater making than in other art forms, and how those become obstacles for theory to flow. Of course, I know it’s exactly those obstacles that theory needs, as relays, as steppingstones to be used to move between discourses and perspectives. Actually, those obstacles point to the fact that theories are abstractions that cannot govern the practice. The theories are discursive events and they are, as said, essential for the movement of thinking, but they cannot be valued and used simply in terms of their propositional content. That is what the obstacles point to and this is a dynamic one has to make amends with and have the strength to stay in the midst of. Sometimes this causes, at least in me, a friction and unsteadiness and that’s probably what you sense.

**IUP**: And what happens if you don’t have the strength to stay in it?

**JP**: I imagine that the art then would have a strong tendency to seek its consistency in conservative and already codified systems, which is another way of saying that it fails to challenge preconceptions, it would just follow the stream.

**IUP**: Yes, that’s a prediction easy to make. But my question has more to do with not understanding the effect, or rather, your way of incorporating how you activate the relation between theory and practice more concretely in your work. What can be said about the relation between these two perspectives, the large compositional and the many discrete fields of theoretical problems? This tension, that you emphasize the importance of being in the midst of, what is its relation to the shaping of the performances? Also, the term totalization, I understand is delineated by how it describes the relation between theory and practice. I do follow that, but at the same time the word sets off an image of a less complex nature, an image of the artifact related to terms like balance and completion and that, on a purely formal level, I think relates to the notion of a beginning and an end of a performance. Aren’t there clashes, or contradictions happening here?

**JP**: I see an interplay of tangled forces that has to be recognized in order to approach these questions. First, I think the last observation that you made further misconstrues the term totalization. I might have indicated the same deviation earlier when using it in relation to the merging of the theoretical with the compositional, but I suggest we bring it back to signify the energy delineated by Deleuze, thus the reaffirming type of relation between theory and practice that he objects to. We have to use other words when describing the creating of the piece, the making of the composition, the putting together of the expressive material. I think it should be understood, and this is especially relevant when using immanent creative processes as a substrate for a discussion on esthetics, that the concept of totalization represents a transcendent force. Anyway, what I make are movements through time and theory is like the opposite, it breaks and creates disruptions. Theory is necessary but it can never resonate life, it is outside life, it is not concerned with aura in any other way than as a critical discourse. The transformation of theory that art making demands that weaves the complexity of the theories into a communicative form, into something that creates percepts outside the realm of intellectual interrelations, outside the compound of references and tangled thought lines, is a process that urgently needs to rely on the phenomenon of aura.  One of the functions of theory, in such a dynamic, is to investigate and deepen the understanding of perception and composition, so that new constructs can be made, constructs that break new ground but still will *stand up on their own*, in other words, don’t depend on a perceptual process of an analytic and deconstructive kind. In their book *What is Philosophy?* Deleuze and Guattari suggest that, from the viewpoint of an implicit model and from the viewpoint of lived perceptions and affections, this sometimes requires “great geometrical improbability, physical imperfection, and organic abnormality. But these sublime errors accede to the necessity of art if they are internal means of standing up (or sitting or lying)” (Deleuze, Guattari 1994, 164). In its extension I see this as dramaturgical thinking. The compositional use of unbalance, of incongruities in the material, of inconsistencies and of the unexpected will happen only if one has an understanding of how percepts and affects can find their rhythm and their way of moving, through paths outside known esthetic formats.

**IUP**: What I hear is that you think the extension of theory furthers compositional thinking. But how, and I apologize for repeating myself, how does this thinking, in a more concrete way, find its way into the performances? It is obvious that it’s not about exposing it in a rendering sense, right, but rather how it purports a reevaluation of expressive matter. Though, is that a strategy often used when problematizing the creative process?

**JP**: I am sorry if I’m unclear, but the sequence is really like this. If I understand or think that I have reached some kind of theoretical understanding of how processes of different kinds move in the world and in consciousness, outside the realm of what we consider art, this sets off a curiosity and an interest to transpose, you could maybe say compress that understanding into movements and forms within the formats that I work with. I am not sure I’m able to make it any more lucid, but I’ll try to give you a discrete example. When Deleuze and Guattari in *A Thousand Plateaus* say that there “is a territory precisely when milieu components cease to be directional, becoming dimensional instead, when they cease to be functional to become expressive.” it generates, on the precondition that there is an understanding of what the concept of territory stands for and how that can be inserted and used in compositional thinking, concrete material that can be investigated, or tested, when creating an expressive form, as well as when looking at performance and directorial thinking and practice (Deleuze and Guattari 2004, 347).

**IUP**: How is that?

**JP**: Well, I imagine that the “components” in the framework of the art I work with, are actor expressions of various kinds, musical expressions and bodily movements. Those are put out into the world in a mode of improvisation, chance and multiplicity.  And, to investigate the potency in the Deleuzian/Guattarian observation, thus enhance the probability of the improvisations to “become expressive,” we need to think of how they can be guided so that they shift from being “directional” and instead become “dimensional,” and how they “cease to be functional.” In other words, we need to somehow clarify the meaning of these terms, in the context of an individual expression within collective improvisation. I choose to see a “directional” energy as an intent-driven movement with a specific and set goal, with a limited capability of listening and of becoming new and different at every precise moment.  The “dimensional” on the other hand grows out of a close listening to the situation, to what happens in the surroundings, though not to the extent of subsuming itself to a system. It “ceases to be functional” by refusing to regard itself and shape itself as  “functional” in a system that represses such movements. It creates a territory on its *own* terms, hence becoming expressive. Here we have a dynamic closely related both to the concepts of multiplicity and univocity, as they operate in a Deleuzian/Guattarian context, but also akin to the concept of anarchic harmony, as used by Cage. All this, is of course a way of reading that is effected by a net of other aspects and thoughts, it’s a fragment of a large weave. Then, we come to the question of how such a reading steers the conceptualization and how the direction is constructed and handled in order to transpose it into actual doing. Partly, it’s about making certain assumptions when setting up the concept for the performance, assumptions about what kind of circumstances and what kind of material and what kind of instructions can trigger those shifts. But the actualization of the reading is even more dependent on connecting, and provoking, each shifting point as concretely as possible with the performers practice. You know, like discussing and experimenting with what the different terms can mean in terms of experiencing relations between the individual expressions, for how the listening moves.

**IUP**: I can definitely see how a reading such as yours is dependent on what you call “a net of aspects.” I presume, though, that it’s even more dependent on an urgency to connect your reasoning to works that you created before all this thinking took place. This presumption comes from feeling that your reasoning is insufficient, a bit of a stretch. In artistic research I have noticed that appropriations of critical discourses often take on an affirmative function, hence they often utilizing concepts in such a limited way that they are disconnected from the complexity of the appropriated discourse, as a whole. Such appropriations are done more or less successfully, or maybe one should say more or less accurately, and can therefore be misguiding. This is a very vague formulation but it is intended to raise the question whether such utilization, *if* it carves out and formulates its own specific circumstances and usage, can be regarded as an acceptable brutalization? The distinction I’m after is about the difference between how esthetic criticism appropriates and how the artist does it.

**JP**: I was heading towards talking about a different aspect of theorizing, in relation to artistic practice, but now you bring up the concept of appropriation and that is certainly a relevant and complicated issue in this context.

**IUP**: We can get back to talking about the relationship between theory and practice later, but for me, from the example you conveyed, the question of how and why appropriations are done seems relevant, don’t you think?

**JP**:  There are many ways of approaching your rather critical observation and I am not certain where to begin. Appropriation, or more precisely, the appropriation of critical discourses into our different doings, is a sequence more or less central to all kinds of reflexivity and this certainly applies to artistic research. It’s all around us as a necessary strategy and this utilization of thought lines and concepts picked up from various critical discourses is most often done to illuminate and problematize different aspects like composition, interpretation, perception, cognition and so on. Obviously there is nothing new in the phenomena of surrounding an art practice with theories, or incorporating them more concretely. I am sure we can both come up with many examples throughout art history that would be proof of this; like the theories of affect in baroque music or the many philosophical investigations embedded in fictional literature. However, I don’t think it would be an exaggeration to say that this dynamic has been radically intensified through the occurrence of artistic research. There is something really interesting happening through that intensification because critical reflective practices, that previously have been more or less secluded from any intrusions and from attempts to test their durability, are challenged by a more coarse treatment.

**IUP**: In 2010 *The Routledge Companion to Artistic Research* was published, a quite extensive anthology with essays on, among other issues, methodology and the nature of artistic research in relation to other types of research. In one of the forewords, Hans-Peter Schwartz uses the terms mono-disciplinary and trans-disciplinary to delineate one of the core advantages in artistic research when he says that a “trans-disciplinary basic understanding represents a considerable advantage over most mono-disciplinary approaches to research dealing with art at scientific universities if we assume – and this is my opinion – that art-based research is not only a self-sufficient theoretical structure but also the driving force of innovation for art production and art reception.” Do you think that the sequence of transposition that you gave an example of earlier is related to what Schwartz talks about as trans-disciplinary? And do you agree with his idea that it could function as a driving force for art production and art reception?

**JP**: I am not sure that it is accurate or clarifying to label the example I gave as trans-disciplinary, and mainly because I see the term as most useful to describe critical undertakings where more or less established *theoretical* discourses are interlinked. But your suggestion is interesting as it positions the practice, what I referred to suggested as the coarse treatment, as one of the poles from which one type of thinking is transferred to another.  As for it being a driving force for developing art and compositional thinking, of course I see it like that, otherwise I would not attempt such an interpretation.

**IUP**: I would like us to stay for a moment with the question of what I earlier called the acceptable, or unacceptable, brutalization of concepts that possibly happens when utilizing them in the artistic practice. Maybe you could reflect on the difference between how esthetic criticism appropriates critical discourses and how the artist does it.

**JP**: The question if the appropriation is acceptable or unacceptable can probably in most cases be discussed, but I don’t actually see it as so important. There are critical attempts that fail to use its deconstructive tools in accordance with their original intrinsic complexity, but concepts, terms and critical thoughts are reconfigured through time and through the grinding process of ongoing usage. To put it very simply, they change, we want them to change in order to make them reverberate in a contemporary context. Some changes are done thoughtfully and creatively, others more carelessly, but both are part of that process. Then, the question of how appropriations are done differently in academic criticism and in artistic research is difficult to talk about without looking more closely at specific examples.

**IUP**: Well, that’s what I am interested in.

**JP**: In artistic research it is an artist who is doing the research, and the appropriations are most often done to problematize and illuminate the prevailing stance and understanding of her esthetics. The position that you inhabit as an artist implies a privilege that ought to be utilized: your practice is to create not to criticize. This does not mean that criticism is absent within the creations, but the movement, I guess one could say, goes in the opposite direction: from problematization into creation – which includes interpretation as well as composition – and therefore can exert a shifting energy. The appropriations become repetition of thought lines and concepts in a pure sense, a repetition *prior* to what the concept represents, in other words, related to what is intuitively sensed in the art practice. On the other hand, esthetic criticism is appropriating concepts and thought lines in order to insert them into *existing* phenomena. The appropriations are done with a referential purpose. This, we know, is a type of writing that creates its system, its framework and form through a continuous mode of referring to doings, as well as to other critical attempts, but it is not dealing with the compositional consequences of the theories, instead reflecting on them. These types of appropriations, for example philosophical discourses and concepts in academic esthetic criticism, are done, as you pointed out, more or less accurately. The utilization implies a certain risk that concepts and thought lines are used in such a restricted way that they are detached from the intrinsic complexity of the thinking that they come from.

**IUP**: I understand “compositional consequences” as explicable of the example you gave earlier and I would definitely like you to expand on that. But before we get to that I’m interested to hear why you contradict yourself, twice as I see it. You said earlier that it’s more or less uninteresting how appropriations are done, and now you seem anxious to criticize it, in a general kind of way.

**JP**: It might be that the reason I fall into a generalizing mode is that there are examples of critical appropriation that lay close to my own field and that somehow disturbs me, in the same way as you said earlier when you mentioned that appropriations are sometime given an “affirmative function.”  I’ll give you an example. Not so long ago I read an article by performance studies scholar Stephen Bottoms that critically looked at the creative process of the American theater group Goat Island (Bottoms 1998). In that article the writer appropriates the concept of the rhizome, as it has been deployed by Deleuze and Guattari, and uses it to describe the distribution of creative power and to delineate a dramaturgical structure. This is clearly an example of brutalization of the concept, to use your formulation, but the question is if it’s acceptable? I don’t really think so, for two reasons. The first is that the thinking that Deleuze/Guattari developed is deeply dependent on the *relation* between concepts. They are intertwined and continuously growing in ways that make them change, one could say that they are to a certain degree in flux. So taking one of them, disconnected from the others, and applying it as a matrix is problematic. The concept of the rhizome is used and activated by Deleuze and Guattari for reasons that have to do with the aspiration of thinking, and as a critique of the normativity embedded in the notion of truth and in the idea of knowledge accumulation. But Bottom’s article uses it to describe a non-hierarchical distribution of creative power within the collective but also to give a picture of a dramaturgical structure. It is not difficult to see the logic and the reasoning behind this appropriation, but I wonder if it wouldn’t be, and I ask myself this question as often as I can, more constructive to deepen the critical approach with the help of extended and nuanced descriptions of a more concrete kind. I think we should use this approach much more than we do, you know, exchange the use of concepts with descriptive language. The second mistake in this article, which I actually think is more critical, is that the philosophy of Deleuze and Deleuze/Guattari, like all philosophical activity, though I tend to see the Deleuzian even more so, is in its core confirmative of the ongoing processes of thinking and living. Therefore it is absolutely necessary, however difficult, to really encompass this perpetual movement and to let it influence the critique. To integrate concepts that are part of this movement into an analysis of artistic practices that strive toward fixity, toward creating artifacts of some kind, contradicts the core of Deleuzian thinking. You can come upon scholars who discuss creative processes through the lens of Deleuzian concepts, and it might hold together on some level of representation, but then again, the actual expressive movements of the performances that they look at are preconceived, even if they might include disparate elements that could be described with words like multilayered, or rhizomatic. So, not only are these observations most often coming from outside a creative practice, which makes them somewhat anemic, but they apply analytical concepts to an object that in itself is resistant to the core characteristics of Deleuzian thinking. I guess you have to see this as the result of an academic economy, otherwise it’s difficult to understand.

**IUP**: And this criticism does not apply to your own work? You seem to be pushing the limits of certain Deleuzian concepts in order to make them fit into your reasoning.

**JP**: Of course I do, I know I do, and that obviously should be scrutinized as it would be wrong to claim my own attempts as something other than a critical injection made to set dramaturgical thinking in motion. Though, when it comes to this latter aspect of applying concepts that derives from a process-oriented discourse on phenomena that do *not* unfold as an unpredictable process, I can only say that what I look at, and try to critically analyze, are artistic expressions that, even if surely bound to predetermined performance strategies, evolve in ways that are unpredictable and new. Not in their format but in their appearance.

**IUP**: But isn’t improvisation always unpredictable? Collective creations of different kinds come about through instant invention. I mean, come on, it is present in most art practices. I read a draft of your text Who’s the Creator? some time ago, and even though I truly think it is interesting, it seemed like there were references missing. Some of the concepts and types of processes that you talk about have been, quite extensively, critically analyzed elsewhere, and those could, in my opinion, be brought into your reasoning much more. Why, for example, are there not more references on the nature of improvisation? Or devising, or other formats of collective creation that contemporary theater uses?

**JP**: There are many existing critical discourses aligned with the problems that I bring up in this work. Like improvisation and devising, both of which are related to a third prevalent concept, which is emergence. All of these are very interesting and also to a certain extent compatible with the line of thought that I try to build. However, my work is not meant as a contribution to the understanding of these concepts on a general level. The reasoning is closely tied to my own practice, and the theoretical extrapolations are, as I keep saying, meant as a structural critique, and therefore the references should serve that purpose. If we take for example the notion of improvisation, I do mention that the concept of improvisation and the readiness to improvise is absolutely crucial in the collective creative processes that the performances are built on. So it would not be strange if I looked more closely at the dynamics of improvisation in relation to all the criticism that’s already out there on this issue. Take for instance somebody like Keith Sawyer who has written a lot on collective emergence and improvisation. To some people who are trying to understand the dynamics of improvisation, his work could be enriching to read. For me, not so much, and it might be that it has to do with esthetics. In one of his books, I think it is *Group Creativity*, he aims at describing the process of improvisation through a musical practice within a specific idiomatic framework. Though, this framework is not analyzed and described with its rules and predetermined formats. He talks about improvisation within jazz music without laying out its strict and clear idiomatic framework, like harmonic progression and its relation to how the improvisation evolves, like its way of using and relating to metric patterns, and of course, aside from all the technical aspects, its historical development. I think, at some point he even says that an improvisation within a jazz idiom is unpredictable. It is almost impossible to relate to that statement. Imagine if I would claim that improvisation in baroque music is unpredictable. Those who know music would just shake their heads. The emergence of creative expressions through an improvisational practice is, of course, interesting. I have spent much of my life in the midst of it, but it is not what I talk about in this work.

**IUP**: There’s a dismissive tone in what you are saying that, even though I can understand your arguments, feels foreign and kind of out of place within a serious reflective academic practice.

**JP**: I don’t have a problem showing respect for the type of academic writing that I mentioned. A lot of work has been put into it, and I could of course just refrain from bringing it up. I don’t mention these examples for any other reason than as stepping stones for describing what I am after myself, in my own critique, as well as they show how complex and difficult it is to activate one type of thinking within another.  
