**IUP:** I sense that there is rich ground to cover in order to understand the choices you have made regarding deciding to not decide. How would you describe, from a more personal point of view, the tension of being in the contradictory position of initiator and director at the same time restricted from using your own judgment to shape the end result. My question comes from being a bit suspicious about this idea that the personal imprint is reduced more by certain esthetic structures and less by others. I’m sure you’ve heard people say that one can always hear in the music that Cage is the composer, even though he placed a lot of responsibility for the expression into the hands of the performers.

**JP:** I don’t see my choice of working within more or less unpredictable forms as a way of not making a mark or a statement, or avoiding responsibility for the esthetic expression. That was definitely not the case for Cage either. The way I see it it’s actually the opposite. But it has taken me awhile to understand why I place myself, and my art practice, in those circumstances. And without saying too much, I think the incentive for the choices I have made is akin to Cage’s. In my early years as a musician I was deeply involved in improvised music and as a consequence of engaging in free improvisation came the challenge to stay in the midst of the uncontrollable. The music demanded that I took responsibility for something I sometimes though was bad. I remember how it ached and ripped the insides of my body, and for a long time I couldn’t make sense of why I chose to express myself through a form that so obviously provoked my tendency to keep things in order and my desire to create balance.

**IUP:** What do you mean with bad? In what sense, in relation to what?

**JP:** As I remember it, what I today refer to as bad was a lack of communication within the ensemble, with the musicians I played with.

**IUP:** So, it doesn’t refer to specific esthetic qualities?

**JP:** No, I think it carries another meaning. If I try to interpret this memory and see it as information, it exposes that there are reasons behind my artistic choices that are clearly visible, and others that are less clear, more sensed then understood. To a certain extent it points to an intuitive pull towards placing myself in creative situations that provoke a desire for balance and control, and towards what now has become a conscious esthetic choice that is sensed – by myself – as problematic and as such invokes a reflective energy, both in the moment of creation and in the moment of perception.

**IUP:** I don’t fully understand. I hear a change in the temporal perspective that moves the early memory into a present awareness. You said “become a conscious esthetic choice.” What is the progression here?

**JP:** A deeper understanding of why I placed myself within a creative situation like that has come to me in later years, through reflections on the specifics of such a creative collaboration, but also through encountering works and ideas by other artists. That has taken some time. As a young musician, music making was an outlet for free expression and a possibility to accommodate my not uncommon desire to not be categorized. Even if the collaborative creative situation caused a feeling of vulnerability and provoked my fear of dependency as well as my urge for control – tendencies I see as part of my personal burden – the sense of expressive freedom combined with the hidden possibilities in the indeterminate process, pulled me into it. Though, I am prone to think that placing the provocative aspect in the background is misleading. Instead, since my involvement with free improvised music, and my commitment to the form was long extensive, I suggest that the provocative aspect – obvious dependency, lack of control – can be interpreted as an urge to become acceptant of something I experienced as disorder, as well as an intuitive way to overcome these personal short comings.

**IUP:** Now you’re talking about an inward movement, that the reasons to do what you did was personal, almost psychodynamic. But mentioning the aspect of perception, as you did earlier, indicates an awareness of its affect. There most be a process going on here, an analytical attempt? Is it possible to disentangle these two focuses?

**JP:** Yes, I would say that one is going inwards, pointing to my own needs and inducements and another, more related to the theory of affect, pointing to the aspiration to create art that contributes not only to esthetic multitude but to esthetic unpredictability and imbalance: as a counter weight to the ordering tendency of esthetic and political power. To think like this or make an analytical attempt, as you called it, should be seen as an addition to the practice of art making, with the intention to move beyond a narcissistic realm.

**IUP:** That is where I want to go with my next question, towards the aspect of intent. What you have been talking about so far, is a creative situation where you were you performed, but you position yourself differently in your practice today. You’re on the outside, facilitating, directing, and in that capacity you often set in motion structures and material that forces you into a position that resembles the vulnerability you experienced when making improvised music. Why do you instigate these kind of processes now, in a larger theatrical context?

**JP:** First, it’s absolutely crucial to understand that what I earlier sometimes experienced as vulnerable situations when being in the unpredictable and uncontrollable, has changed. Now, if I find myself inside a creative situation that is esthetically predictable, even as an audience member, I feel left out. I connect this crucial turn-around to an experience I had that at the time I couldn’t really understand. Right in the middle of a working process at the theater and surrounded by a lot of people, a situation I sincerely liked, I could feel really dark, almost depressed. And I started to wonder if there was something in the hierarchical situation, with myself as leader and as such positioned outside and disconnected from the course of the performance, its execution and rhythmical progression, that was the cause of this sorrow. Or was I just tired of my own voice and distrustful of my ideas and decisions? These feelings and thoughts came, as I remember it, from the experience of directing plays of a more conventional character where a set script was to be interpreted and staged and the work with my collaborators was aimed at shaping a fixed expression. In that situation, I felt depraved of being a part of things. Obviously, not from the discussions about different creative decisions, but from the collaborative expression emerging in the present moment. When I look back I see this experience of outsideness as a catalyst that inspired me to work the way I do. To create concepts for collective creations with an immanent energy at the core, is a way to deduct the predictability of my own esthetic choices, and a means to create participation through a simultaneous and shared discovery.

**IUP:** It sounds like you have come full circle, ending up where you started, but now supplemented with a layer of esthetic criticism.  I am interested in what this sequence, or circle of development, actually represents, and why you set it in motion? We hopefully have time to get back to that. Though, I would like you to say more about why an immanent process is of such importance to you?

**JP:** Facilitating immanent creative processes is to instigate movements of variation and to participate in variation is to accept one’s connectedness and dependency. The vibration of variation thus constitutes the substrate in the search for the roots of my esthetic stance, and it exposes the fragility of dependency. When in variation there is a possibility to move beyond the predictable self. Or: If the self, and its emotional conditions, is experienced as limited, the immanent process is a way to disconnect the restrained personal from the outcome of the expressive whole. Cage says: “I wanted my work to be free of my own likes and dislikes, because I think music should be free of the feelings and ideas of the composer” (Kostelanetz 1987, 65). The emotional experience is then relocated; from the moment of creation to the moment of perception.

**IUP:** Relocated for the artist, that is.

**JP:** Yes, of course. And that relocation holds a possibility to experience the unfamiliar and be surprised. To initiate immanent creative processes is to create situations where I don’t know what is going to happen. Or, you could say, that the hidden possibilities of immanent processes equal the emergence of something never before experienced.

**IUP:** So, as I understand it, the shared discovery is the moment when the initiator, the composer in the case of Cage, and the audience come together in the listening. But your use of the word participation seems like a stretch if it is describing an audience member taking part in a creative act, or even you as the director. What kind of participation is that, specifically, beyond participating in the event, you know buying my ticket, sitting in the audience, thinking, feeling, being bored?

**JP:** In the case of the performances we are talking about, the performer does not know beforehand what to express or how to shape it, neither does he or she know what the others in the ensemble are going to do: the unfolding of the expressive form is happening together with the audience, during shared time. Together they participate in experiencing something new emerging. The dynamic of this experience is of course different if you sit behind the piano or in the audience, but I use it as a description of a shared present moment. I don’t need to talk more about the aspect of participation, really. We did that, in relation to Rancière’s book a few weeks ago, and it is a very interesting aspect when discussing dramaturgical questions, but in order to get further with that we need to look at participation *in what?* If we don’t discuss participation based on an analysis of dramaturgical structures, the differentiation of the concept of participation will not happen.

**IUP:** And you mean that such a discussion should evolve around the elimination of narratives, indeterminacy and immanent creative processes?

**JP:** That is not what I am saying. Those perspectives, or parameters, are obviously not the only entry into discussing this topic. It has constructively been approached for a long time and from many different angles in performance theory. Though, those aspects that you mention are highly active and in the foreground of what I do.

**IUP:** It is obviously not difficult to see the reason for your immediate incorporation of the term and concept of variation when talking about an immanent creative process. It points very concretely to the process of constant change, and it is a term Deleuze uses. In *One less Manifesto* he says that the instigation of continuous variation is a way to eliminate representation and thus to eliminate the power of theatrical signs. How do you connect to and develop that in relation to your objectives?

**JP:** In order to understand variation in relation to the thinking of Deleuze it is probably necessary to connect it to his thinking about difference, when he says that difference is behind everything but behind difference there is nothing. Though, relating the movement of variation, as you asked, to my own objectives I choose to see that’s what’s highly charged is its direct opposition to fixed definitions. To be in variation is to reject one single truth. Or: Variation opposes fixed definitions. As I suggested earlier, the choice of involving myself in immanent processes could be seen as my feisty reaction to finding myself in a world of expressions where specific ideas are purported as true. My reaction to the oppressiveness of fixed definitions can be seen both as a part of defining an esthetic of my own, in my younger years, but maybe more interesting is to view it, especially as it has prevailed, as an artistic opposition to generalizations. Variation as a counterforce to generalizations - the ones that repress me as well as the ones I use to repress others – is placed in a theatrical context by Deleuze when he says that “might not continuous variation be just such an amplitude that always overflows, by excess or lack, the representative threshold of majority measure? Might not continuous variation be the minority becoming of everybody in contrast to the majority rule of Nobody. Might not theater, thus, discover a sufficiently modest, but nevertheless, effective function?” (Murray 1997, 253).

**IUP:** So, variation is a process of continuous change, the rejection of fixed definitions. But that is not something that you instigate. That would be presumptuous to say, would it not?
Mustn’t it be seen as a choice of stance, a chosen outlook?

**JP:** Obviously, setting in motion immanent creative processes can, even in the context of a theater performance, be seen as a continuation of a process already in motion. Such a view dissolves the object; no beginning, no middle, no end can be experienced. Variation as artistic intention thus creates a blurring of the distinctions between art and life, and a temporal connection between the messy and complex process of my inner life and the activities that happen to happen in the theater, occur. The emotionality that is laid bare in my two observations from earlier experiences, indicates an unformulated inclination towards this dissolving of boundaries. But turning back to Deleuze I find, which is maybe the most interesting and demanding dynamic of variation, that from a perceptual point of view it is inevitably related to a consciousness about difference, to all differences around us. He says that it “is in difference that movement is produced as an ‘effect’, that phenomena flash their meaning like signs. The intense world of differences, in which we find reason behind qualities and the being of sensible, is precisely the object of a superior empiricism. This empiricism teaches us a strange ‘reason’, that of the multiple, chaos and difference – nomadic distributions, crowned anarchies. It is always differences which resemble one another, which are analogous, opposed or identical: difference is behind everything, but behind difference is nothing” (Deleuze 1994, 57). If this is understood beyond fear, and seen as the one and only resource to turn to, my engagement in immanent processes is an intuitive way of doing just that.

**IUP:** Beyond fear?

**JP:** Well, the word nothing creates the image of a void. To truly move your awareness of difference as being behind everything, allows you, or forces you, to look into that void. Difference is what generates life, as well as our perception of it, and that movement is perpetual. Though, if awareness is moved into the realm of relations, any relation, human or non-human, all hierarchies and all generalizations have to be abandoned. That is demanding and many people avoid it.

**IUP:** The concept of variation hence casts a stark light on all relations, human acceptance, on ethics definitely, far outside your own creative space.

**JP:** Absolutely. It helps me to move beyond the burden of my own tiresome voice and its inevitable predictability. It requires different changes in the way I place myself in relation to my collaborators as well as a redefinitions of esthetic preferences. The memory I shared earlier, about feeling dark when directing, implicitly tells about a desire to change the traditional hierarchical structure in which theater art often is created. Therefore I feel akin to Cage when he says: “I want to give up the traditional view that art is a means of self-expression for the view that art is a means of self-alteration, and what it alters is mind, and mind is in the world and is a social fact” (Kostelanetz 1987, 216). Change and self-alteration does not, as I choose to read this, only relate to the perceiver but to the creator as well. And this need that I felt to change my position was met through facilitating processes of immanence.

**IUP:** You mentioned that there is a search in all this for the roots of your esthetic choices. What is that about? Or rather, why is it important to uncover those roots, and maybe more interesting, is that something that needs to be shared? I can see a reasoning in your critical attempt that can contribute to discussions around dramaturgy and theater directing, but what is there to gain from getting an insight into this more personal level? Even though my first question indicates that I am curious to hear about the reasons why a director actively chooses a position that to a large degree undermines his responsibility for the expressive output, I question the function of such a perspective within a critical pursuit. It tends to result in a certain blurriness.

**JP:** Is that a question?

**IUP:** The question is, what do you think this more personal perspective contributes?

**JP:** Well, the move beyond structural reflections is a move away from criticism of a formal kind, towards a perspective of a more personal and illusive type. Instigating this is based on the assumption that, since my own limitations are unfortunately not unique, such a perspective can contribute to a critical discussion of the work and role of the director, as it puts the dynamic of that position in more vibrant contact with the structural characteristics of the performance. Also, to look at my practice from a personal perspective and to ask questions around what it is that pulls me towards creating concepts and structures where my own impact as director is dramatically reduced, actually helps me to see more clearly the relationship between my expressive intent and structural specifics, and that, I think, can open up for possibilities to expand the directorial practice beyond the activity of interpretation.  

**IUP:** All fine, but I feel the tone suggests that you think that this is a new idea, and I think it would come off better if you acknowledged that lots of performing artists and art groups have asked similar questions.

**JP:** What I say – or do – does not aspire to be original in some pompous all-encapsulating way, really. And to continuously make that clear to the reader would implicitly stupidify them. Certainly I know that it is one of the core requirements in conservative academic writing, that its stability and authority is built around acknowledging its relation to existing thinking and research. I think the energy and the aspirations of artistic research should be somewhat different. It is based on an artistic sensitivity and relates to artistic outputs. That does not mean that arguments shouldn’t hold together or that the demand for producing criticism should be ignored. But your comment points to the academic formula of continually referencing observations to preexisting thoughts, anxious not to take any risks.
Here we might find the most obvious friction between the artist and the critic, since the artist is putting things into the world that are unstable, vague and transparent to a certain degree. So it must be, there lies its aura. The critique produced by the traditional academic is not interested in aura, only clarity, whatever that is.

**IUP:** Is that not an easy way out? After all, you produce this work within an academic framework and why budge from the idea of stabilizing your thinking by connecting it to existing thinking, and doings?

**JP:** I don’t do that. As we discussed in an earlier conversation, I find that none of my intellectual extensions, or my concrete theater making, could move forward without conflating it with a large number of other voices, ranging from crisp academic to intuitive reactions in the rehearsal space. To say the least, all my doings would be impeded if that would not be the case. Though, I don’t think it is necessary to give my voice strength by continuously backing up my reflections with more or less reasonable references and I don’t feel it’s inadequate to include my personal perspective. That’s where we started talking today, wasn’t it, in the question Why the personal?
