## Prologue
Like most research, this investigation moves down to intricate levels of its subject. Its communicative potential is, for the most part, accessible only through a close, detailed attentiveness to all its micro-movements. It becomes, inevitably so, dependent on its own system of reasoning; it has to revolve around itself so that it can exit at a different point from where it entered. The intention is, however, to make that exit point broad, and fully open for contact. And that is one of the main things I want these introductory words to convey, that the initial impetus for this exploration acknowledges the wide perspective of navigating through the multiple, complex and potentially contradictory sets of experiences that life forces us to encounter. As an artist, I want to be sensitive to that inevitability. I want to let go of the idea of my self as a stable subject, and search for an alternative subjectivity. This is not about one specific repositioning but a constantly changing alternative, a venture away from the fixed and secure. I feel a real urgency to elaborate alternative accounts, to learn to think differently about myself in the world, as well as in collaborative creative situations and it is through the encounter with other voices that this motion can be sustained. These voices transpire from a variety of times and sources that vary in quality; they materialize as texts, as sounds, as speech and movements. Sometimes they just happen to be there, but there is also a constant intuitive search at work. In that search I have detected different patterns in regards to themes and structures. It is as if certain voices emerge from some deep place and pull me in, hence not there as a result of immediate conscious decisions, but still they expose related fields of problems: a mistrust of language; a troublesome relation to the idea of communication; an inclination to be in flux, to be surprised, to let go of control; the longing for a togetherness. Over the years this has resulted in an engagement with a variety of writers, composers and artists who I have drawn into the tangled process of theater making. Shaped by their influence, and by all the accumulated intuitive decisions and esthetic choices that go into the making of performances, lies what I have come to see and understand as a strong ethical undertow. This is not an uncommon or rare outcome of an art practice, rather it can be seen as what represents the impetus for many artists if the meaning of the concept is widened to include outlooks on life’s conditions and human relations. But the question for me, and which this work is intended to reflect upon, is in what way the aspect of ethics plays out in relation to how I shape my way of working, in relation to the nature of the materials that I set in motion, and to the specifics of the collaborative creative processes – all within the realm of theater making. In short, the present work is about the relation between esthetics and ethics.

I move into this exploration as a theater director, which means that the study has its roots both in collective creative work, as well as in those very personal energies, experiences, and convictions that constitute the incentive for creating what I do. These two strands are parallel but represent quite different impetuses. In the collective creative processes, sharing and collaborative building is central, and it has a rather concrete quality. Space, time, social dynamics and dialogue, and practicalities of all kinds influence such a process. It is the type of creative work that oftentimes needs a pragmatic approach. And that approach hovers, at least to a certain degree, over this critical undertaking as it aims to problematize rather expansive questions from a limited material. The personal aspect, on the other hand, infuses something that is more elusive and yet quite stern. Let me see if I can make this clear. As I have my roots in the tactile and sensual experiences of music making, there is an inclination to assign experiential importance to that which exists outside language, to the abstract power of rhythm, and sound and embodied relations. That level is elusive, it is sensual, but it underlies my esthetics, as well as my reasoning. It is the transparent texture that I hope can, to some degree, fill the gaps of language.

With an urgency, akin to that abstract momentum, I place my tendency to think about art making in a rather specific political sense. The result might be, in places, that my extrapolations radiate a generality of sorts. It would be misleading to say that it is unintentional, as I am convinced that my own thinking can only find its validity – as well as open itself up for criticism – if such a risk is embraced. With that said, it is important to keep in mind that this critical attempt is intuitive and personal. It is not an exploration where the investigative gaze is undefined, critically hovering over an array of examples and references. My work as a theater director demands that I offer something for people to engage in, to react to. Such a stance is only concerned with how it relates to phenomena *outside* its own means of production. This is a challenge I also try to meet in this critical undertaking: even if the investigation probes specific and intricate levels of theater making, it also aims to evoke some fundamental questions about the relationship between theater and the world in which it is placed. One could say that the overarching intent is to contribute to discussions on how linkages can be made between the most intricate inner workings of theatrical expression and an outlook on human life. In the following introduction I will outline my investigative focus and the path of reasoning I follow to integrate and transform these rather abstract formulations into the concreteness of making – and experiencing – theater.

## The search and the material
The present research project, with its assemblage of materials, is an attempt to explore the implications of the concept of immanence in the collective creative process of theater making. In particular, it is an effort to illuminate what we might call  “processes of immanence,” or “theater of immanence.”<sup>1</sup><div class="footnote"><sup>1</sup> The term “theater of immanence” comes from the book Theatres of Immanence (2012) by Laura Cull, a reference that I will often return to.</div> My aim is to present a net of questions, observations, and thoughts ranging from the experiences of collective creative processes and collaborative work with the performers, to academic criticism on discourses related to the fields of performance studies, philosophy and performance philosophy, perception theory, and musicology. By unfurling this net I hope to contribute to the theories around the relationship between the structural specifics of theater – dramaturgically and compositionally – and the aspects of meaning and affect. Though, that formulation encapsulates a number of investigative sub-areas that can be broadly defined as: transforming theories into concrete compositional and processual measures; developing dramaturgical discourses beyond semantic language; problematizing a binary relation between composition/conceptualization and an intuitive, emotional creative force; discussing how to enhance a readiness for variation in the performers; problematizing hierarchical structures, both in regards to the hierarchy of expressions, as well as creative influence; mapping out a thought process for a directorial practice; and finally, searching for a possible reciprocity between compositional structures and ethics.

The scope of this work is, therefore, relatively large, and it is fair to prepare the reader that not only does this multitude of critical angles produce a number of relevant but somewhat subordinate discursive extensions, *but also* that the unfolding of the reasoning is rather slow. Ideas, terms and concepts that are encountered early on might not be explained and fleshed out until further into the reading. The main reason for such a progression is that the subject matter consists of many layers that are thoroughly intertwined. Therefore, it might be constructive to return – and I will do my best to do the same – to what the critical investigation is mainly about: a search for the relationship between structural specifics of theater and the aspects of meaning and affect.<sup>2</sup><div class="footnote"><sup>2</sup> The, by now, rather large and influential critical discourse that goes under the name of Affect Theory, is not incorporated and used in this exploration. It could certainly be regarded as related to some of the theoretical levels that I problematize, but it would also be a move away from compositional and dramaturgical questions. </div>

The investigation will be based on my experience of conceptualizing and directing three different theater performances, all built around material that in one way or another originated from the American composer and artist John Cage (1912-1992). These performances will function as my main reference. They were constructed with different components, made under different kinds of production conditions, they incorporate quite different dramaturgical structures, and different groups of performers collaborated for each performance. There are however three important aspects that the performances share, and that illuminate the questions and areas that are being problematized. The first and most crucial aspect is what I alternately will talk about as multiplicities, individual expressive trajectories, superimpositions, expressive polyphony, and overload. These are terms and phenomena descriptive of an expressive instability and convergent with the idea that the expression consolidates through the indeterminate unfolding of multiple expressive relations and not through thorough composition<sup>3</sup>.<div class="footnote"><sup>3</sup> *Thorough composition* is a musical term descriptive of a compositional structure in which the material is precisely defined and set (all relations between the parameters), organized, and brought to consolidation according to internal, autonomous premises. The term will be used at some points in this reasoning as contrary to an immanent “logic.” </div> The second aspect is that they are dependent on a strong creative investment by the performers – on their capacity to improvise and invent – since the conceptual setups place, at the center, the creative responsibility onto the individual performer. The third aspect shared by the performances, in different ways, is that they are all formed around musical compositions, and embedded in musical movements. This is not only crucial to the structure and intensity of the performances, but it also influences the critical gaze and the concepts and terms that are used in the investigation. The titles of the performances are *John and the Mushrooms*, *vorschläge* and *Ryaonji – A Meeting.*

The performances move through time and nothing that is experienced within that time will be, or can be recaptured; they bring forth their “materiality exclusively in the present and immediately destroy it again the moment it is created, setting in motion a continuous cycle of generating materiality” (Fischer-Lichte 2008, 76). Fortunately, my attempt here is not about trying to recapture something that has past. If the critical processing is to have a positive and direct relation with things, it is only to the extent that it claims to grasp the thing itself, what it is: its way of finding consistency. In other words, the creative doings are not critically looked at with the intent to lock them in some kind of conclusiveness, but rather to search for possible extensions. What those possible extensions might be is something that I will discuss throughout. For now I will just briefly outline the esthetic foundation from which the investigative explications will be drawn, and what will constitute its main focus. Initially, it has to be understood that the critical gaze is placed precisely in the center of creative performative processes inhabited by actors, dancers, musicians and audience members; all surrounded by improvised bodily movements, words, and sounds. The performers, setting all this in motion, are engaged in a collaborative collective creation in which indeterminacy and improvisation steer the progression rather than a predetermined and rehearsed script/score of some kind. This means that the expressions are dominated by a non-narrative multiplicity, in which individually improvised expressive forms co-exist in a polyphonic togetherness. It is the unfolding of this creative and perceptive dynamic that the investigation is all about, and which I will look at from four different angles. The first of those angles could be seen as the substrate for the others: how the exchange of stimuli and expressions move and grow within a group of performers when chance and improvisation is the base for the creative inventions. Secondly, in such a creative situation the aspect of hierarchy – creative/artistic, as well as social – is charged and I will try to examine how it plays out and effects the collaboration. The third angle is about meaning. I will look at how it can be defined and how it is produced in a polyphonic and non-narrative expressive structure. The fourth critical approach is an attempt to carve out and discuss a possible correlation between the expressive structures that the performances represent and a notion of ethics delineated by the concept of potentiality.

The investigated materials are theater performances and the questions that I look at stem from creative and perceptive situations during the making and perceiving of theater. Though, in the critical treatment of the investigated material I have chosen to activate philosophical discourses rather than applying critical perspectives that more obviously belong to performance studies. This philosophical approach will be mainly represented by the French philosopher Gillez Deleuze (1925–1995), but also by Canadian philosopher Brian Massumi (1956–), and the Italian/Australian philosopher Rosi Braidotti (1954–). A number of secondary sources and critical extensions that utilize Deleuze’s theories in discussions on art and theater will be used, as well as some within the field of performance studies. Among these are philosopher and performance studies scholar Laura Cull, philosopher and Deleuze scholar Claire Colebrook, art theoretician and Deleuze scholar Simon O’Sullivan, performance studies scholar Erika Fischer-Lichte, and philosopher and Deleuze scholar Manuel Delanda.

Before explaining in more depth the critical foundation, I will outline the disposition of the work and the central themes and concepts that will be used.

## Disposition and critical themes
Three different types of texts are presented in the project: descriptive texts, essays, and interviews. They intentionally unfold in somewhat different modes, hence, are meant to create a juxtapositional dynamic. The descriptive texts describe the making of the three theater performances, and go into detail, regarding: material, dramaturgical organization and conceptualization, rehearsal processes and the performance situations. These texts are linked to filmed documentations, still pictures, side texts of an explanatory quality, sound/music recordings/documentations, interviews with the performers, and to musical scores and manuscripts. The underlying aim of these descriptions is to give an account of how the performances were conceptualized and created, thus to enable an understanding of how the critical discourse connects to the different conceptual levels and to the specifics of the material. Together with the documentations, the descriptive texts are also meant to offer a sense of the tactile aspects of the making of the performances, a corporeal substrate for the reflexive augmentations. The descriptions sometimes deviate from the descriptive mode. I would like those deviations to be understood as telling of my artistic practice, i.e. of how my thoughts move and develop in order to take on the task of directing, rather than understood as critical extensions detached from my practice. This comment is maybe most important to keep in mind when approaching the text *Cage Interpreted and Performed*, which includes an extensive description of John Cage’s esthetics.

If the descriptive texts emerge out of the corporeality of the performances, the essays on the other hand pull the experiences into a more taut, reflective apparatus. They are developed to elevate the tactile experiences and the structural observations into an esthetic-philosophical reasoning, by investigating the connections between the performances and a broader existential/philosophical outlook on life. As such they enclose the practice by revealing what reverberates underneath the esthetics of the performances, as well as by indicating what hovers above them, as possible prolongations (what I earlier talked about as extensions). The three essays are titled: *Who is the creator?*, *Meeting – Meaning* and *The Rhythm of Thinking.*

In the process of creating a critical dialogue pertaining to the questions that my project revolves around, I have formed an institute called *Institute for Unpredictable Processes*.<sup>4</sup><div class="footnote"><sup>4</sup> *Institute for Unpredictable Processes* was founded in San Francisco, USA, in 2013. The institute is a center for art and research exploring collective and individual artistic processes where improvisation and indeterminacy are major factors, and it is organized around shorter or longer projects in which different artists and researchers participate. The institute is devoted to promote, publish and present art and research that examines the circumstances and conditions specific to processes where varied types of unpredictability are in play. The work of the institute is guided by the idea that the investigation into these processes can enhance the readiness to include unpredictable factors in processes outside the discrete realm of art making, and by doing so allow for more freedom of thought among people.</div> This institute has over time conducted a number of interviews with me, and five of those are included in the presentation. The questions taken up in these interviews emanate from the engagement and involvement with a large number of colleagues and the themes and aspects that transpire sometimes go into areas that are not treated elsewhere in this thesis. The interviews are placed in conjunction with the themes reflected on in the texts surrounding them and should be seen as critical expansions, but in a different mode.

*Interview 20*, which follows this introductory chapter, approaches some critical questions about the overall structure of the work. It attempts to accommodate the demands that the reader might experience from the multitude of themes and aspects presented. The question of how the research aspect can be thought about is addressed, and it discusses who the receiver of a work like this could be.

In the text *Cage interpreted and performed*, the process and thinking behind creating the performance of *John and the Mushrooms* is rendered. Since John Cage’s art is so central to the project as a whole, the text also looks at his influences, his artistic development and what was central in his esthetics and compositional methods, and therefore decisive in the different decisions when making the performance. The text goes on to describe how Cage’s esthetic principles steered the construction of the performative concept, how they effected the rehearsal process, the building of the performance space and how they colored the relationship between the performance and its audience. The structure of the script is described, as well as how the music was incorporated. When we made the performance we collaborated with a reference group. That collaboration, its development and how it influenced the creative process, is also explained. The last part of the text introduces, in three separate sections, a discussion on how the material and the conceptual setup somewhat forced the different roles – the performer, director, and audience member – to shift. These are shifts that to a large degree have to do with the allocation of responsibility for how the expression is formed and how it finds meaning. All these aspects considered, the main concern of this text is to render the process of transferring and transposing the esthetics and thinking of Cage, into the theatrical performance.

In *Interview 3* the relation between theory and practice is discussed. It treats the friction between my critical activity and practice as a director, and introduces some core problems by appropriating critical thinking from outside the field of the actual practice. It discusses if/how theory can be more partial, if it can operate on and relate to limited fields, thus it considers the ambition to merge a theoretical/philosophical reasoning with compositional and dramaturgical thinking.

The second descriptive text, *Hierarchy in Creation*, describes how the sound art piece *vorschläge*, based on a composition (with the same title), by the German composer Mathias Spahlinger, was made. It starts by outlining the work and esthetics of Spahlinger, and goes on to untangle his composition in detail, as well as the concept and the structure of the performance. The text then tells about the process of preparing the performance and selecting which material to include, the translation process and production preparations. Following the process of the recordings, it then describes the communication dynamic within the ensemble. The composition, and consequently the critical explication, pulls into focus the issue of creative hierarchy. It problematizes the relations between the authority of the author, the demands of the material (that is intended to be set in motion as an esthetic expression), and the creative investment of the musician(s). Spahlinger implicitly makes the assumption that the individual musician carries a double picture of him/her self; partly as an autonomous creative individual and partly as a worker who is the means to the production of an object that does not belong to him or her, and which he/she has no role in designing. The suggested radicality – which certainly becomes a contradiction – lies in the implication that to infuse vitality in creation/interpretation (therefore in society), a dissolving of the author is necessary. Just as Spahlinger, in his composition, illuminates and questions his authoritative position, I try to problemitize my own role as initiator and director. This strain is one of the most important esthetic aspects in the construction of all three performances, as well as a central theme in the critical investigation. Following that focus, I introduce the idea of *directing as participation*, which is a conceptual attempt to encapsulate how directing can be not only about initiating, but also about moving along the unfolding of the event with a sense of participating in it, even though not concretely contributing.  The text goes on to develop, in line with the problematization that Spahlinger’s composition brings to light, the idea that the interpretation of the composition involves the forming of sociometric patterns.

The conversation in *Interview 7* revolves around aspects of a personal nature and my reasons for initiating immanent creative processes. It brings up questions around the situation of being in the contradictory position of initiator and director, and at the same time relinquishing the use of my own judgment to shape the end result. From there it moves into the question of whether or not working with unpredictable forms is a way of forfeiting the individual mark or statement. This leads into a discussion about esthetic/expressive intent. The interview also addresses the aspect of the director’s involvement in expressions that are in continuous variation.

The third descriptive text, *Differentiated Presence*, which tells about the performance of *Ryoanji – A Meeting*, takes on a slightly different quality. In the rendering of the two other performances, the descriptive gaze is positioned in the middle of the creative process. In this text, the critical dynamic is instead generated through a juxtaposition of the directorial intent with the experience of being a viewer. This position shifts the focus away from the creative process, towards possible ways that the performance can be perceived; its potentiality. The question then becomes: how does the aim of the concept relate to the experience of viewing it? The text starts with a detailed description of Cage’s composition *Ryoanji*, and explains how the structure of the performance was conceptualized. Interviews with the musicians, who share their view of the composition and the challenges to perform it within the realm of the performative collaboration, are intertwined. The directorial/choreographic methodology that I applied when I created the performance were different performative tasks to be used for investigating and developing individual bodily expressions, and this methodology is described in detail. In conjunction with the concepts of expressive multiplicities, superimpositions and multi-vocality, the term *relation-of-nonrelation* is introduced. It is a term that is central to my reasoning as a whole and is appropriated from the thinking of philosopher Brian Massumi. It refers to the unfolding of perceptive processes and reoccurs at different places in this investigation as it closely relates to the discourse of *process philosophy* and to the dynamics and workings of *co-composition*. The text then goes on to discuss how the convergence of the individual expressive trajectories – created by the dancers – might influence their initial intention, and the possibility of contaminating each other. In order to deepen the exposition of how I imagined the individual audience member would/could experience the performance, the text continues with a longer “note” on my reaction to viewing the documentations. As a conclusion, of sorts, it ends with a comment on the important fact that the performance of *Ryoanji – A Meeting* does not performatively expose its investigative intention, and how this circumstance implies a perceptive difference, in comparison with the other two performances.

*Who is the Creator?* is the first of the three essays that descriptively attempts to translate the tactile experiences into a theoretical and philosophical reasoning. The critical gaze is mainly positioned within the ensemble, and examines the complex flow of energies among the performers when chance and unpredictability are at play. The text makes use of the concept of immanence, to illuminate the difference between transcendent processes and immanent processes and the relationship thereof regarding the demands on the director and on the performers. This is further developed into the question of how immanent processes occur and can be sustained in collective creative situations. The two concepts *consistency* and *consolidation* are introduced to delineate and describe how expressive matter, produced within the immanent creative process, takes form and transforms. And then they are utilized to investigate how all the “separate” parts of the performances relate and hold together. The text then moves into the question of creative responsibility in collaborative theater work where the concepts of chance, indeterminacy and improvisation are in play. It looks at the creativity of the individual and its dependence on and consideration of the group, asking questions like: what is the relation between the individual desire to express and the expression of the whole? What is the relation between individual creative responsibility and collective creative responsibility? The term *shifting of roles* is developed to further describe the individual responsibility in the collective creation, which in turn demands that the term *collective creation* is put aside in favor of the term *instant collective composition*. The discussion about instant collective composition instigates a closer look at the question of what the performers really experience they are a part of. What does the immanent process make them feel that they are creatively participating in? In connection to these questions, the last part of the essay extends the discussion around creative hierarchy, and problematizes my own position as instigator and leader of the collaboration.

In *Interview 5*, the discussion around the notion of appropriation of critical and philosophical discourses into creative activity is deepened. And it problematizes the question of thinking in relation to creative doings.

The reasoning in the essay *Meeting - Meaning* expands the question of an immanent process to include the exchange between the expression of the performance and its audience, i.e. descriptive of a mode of sharing amongst *everybody simultaneously present in space and time*, as participants in the theatrical presentation. It attempts to unravel how different formal structures can be created to enhance the possibility for the audience to be co-creative when experiencing the performance. This, in turn, extends into questions around the production of meaning: is meaning inherent in the experience of co-composition? And if so, can the experience of co-composition be thought of as a process of becoming? The communicative interplay that these questions indicate inevitably elicit other concepts and ways of looking at the performance situation, as preconceptions of what theater “is,” of what a theater space should look like, and of how a story “should” unfold, and must be confronted. So, taking off from this idea of an extended immanent process, the reasoning will problematize three aspects that, in their combined dynamic, encapsulate the complex question of meaning: The notion of communality in the shared experience of the performance; the workings of a representational coding, and the unfolding a co-compositional activity. The idea that a group of people sharing space and time form a social community has, for a very long time, functioned as something of a dramaturgical substrate, an unavoidable condition, when critical investigations on the impact of theater have been developed. In contemporary theater, as well as in performance studies, this notion is however challenged on both dramaturgical and generalizing grounds, but the view that this dynamic consists of just two components – the performance and the audience – still, to a large degree, prevails as a precondition for the different critical attempts. In expressive structures dominated by superimpositions and multiple expressive trajectories this has to be problematized beyond the idea of a meeting between these two components, because just as the merging of the expressive material is elusive and in flux, the communality of the audience is fully differentiated, and is examined with that in mind.

When reflecting on the production of meaning, it is crucial to problematize the function of representation: representation as a system where the codification of signs, symbols, semantic and semiotic language are established.  This is the system in which the performances that we are looking at operate: They are part of a world built on a representational coding. But as representation purports definitions as fixed, as operating with defined measures, and thus can be seen as exerting a transcendent force, it is essential for the immanent creative process, as well as for the over all esthetic intention, to not only problematize its workings in the moment of perception but to look at how it can be counteracted and replaced by the notion of presence. The critique of representational esthetics moves like an eddy, round and round and round, and it produces overlapping reflections on the phenomena, its constitution, power, importance, unavoidability and crisis. This work will not draw on that apparatus and the many strains of thought connected to it. Instead I will view representation as an obstruction that enhances the goal of the performances, and as an unavoidable precondition in the creative processes, as well as in the dramaturgical thinking, *and* in the making of the compositional structure. Those are structures characterized by multiple expressions simultaneously set in motion to create superimpositions in which not one single narrative trajectory or expressive focus can be delineated and the audience therefore are “forced to independently prioritize their sensorial impressions” (Fisher-Lichte 2008, 33). The emergence of meaning in such a perceptual environment generates a need to exchange/transform/extend the concept of an immanent process towards the concepts of co-composition and co-creation, in diverse ways and combinations. As those terms can be said to connote a certain degree of active structuring/restructuring in the perceptive moment, the reasoning aims to explore how this activity unfolds, what it is dependent on, and its potential.

*Interview 14* starts with a discussion about expressive instability. This is a term that I introduce in the context of experiencing expressions dominated by multiple expressive trajectories and superimpositions. It is used to describe a performative structure that is not only in continuous variation, but also in continuous contemplation. The realm of perception and the esthetic/perceptive reasoning for allowing chance, indeterminacy and unpredictability to have an important role in the performances, is discussed, as well as, the relation between such structures and the possibility of self-creation. The aspect of ethics is touched upon in relation to Cage and his view on experimentation, and the idea of encountering something never before experienced as crucial in determining if a theater performance can be referred to as more or less ethical. Embedded in this thought lies the question of how the vitality and self-enjoyment, that is hopefully/possibly gained from experiencing the expressional force of the performance, can have an affect on the relationships that the individual in the audience engages in outside the theater. The notion that a reciprocity exists between the movement of thought and ethics, is also discussed.

This ethico-esthetic perspective is the main theme in the essay *The Rhythm of Thinking*. In the directorial and dramaturgical approach, in the nature of the creative processes, in the quality of the performed material, there is an overarching esthetic principle which I claim is an *embodied vision of the subject*; an ethics. Later in this introduction I will outline the meaning of this term, but it encapsulates an idea, actually a conviction, of how an outlook on the potentiality of the human subject constitutes a foundation for an ethics. The artistic attempt has been to transform this vision into performative structures and these research reflections, taken together, are then in turn an attempt to illuminate how this vision relates to the constitution of the different compositional aspects of the performances. To explain – and scrutinize – this claim of a reciprocal relation between a vision of the subject and the esthetics of the performances, the text tries to explicate how the dramaturgical and compositional construct of the performances correlates to my outlook on the world. It starts out with circumscribing how ethics is defined and used in the apparatus, and connects it to the activity of *figuring-out*. In explaining the use of that activity/concept I make something of a detour, in examining some related dramaturgical reflections made by Berthold Brecht. The text then goes back to looking at how an onto-ethics can be formulated and this is done through the thinking of Rosi Braidotti, Gillez Deleuze and Brian Massumi. The text experiments with connecting the experiences of co-composing and becoming with the movement of thinking and its relation to the purely sensed. In doing so, and by placing it in the directorial practice, the concept of “forming the circumstances” as a directorial approach is explained, and this is done in close connection to the concept of *univocity*. Reconnecting to the reasoning in the text *Meeting-Meaning*, the last part looks at the relation between the forces of a representational and a non-representational coding in relation to ethics, thus exploring ways to approach some questions that run throughout this work: Can the occurrence of immanent processes in the exchange between the performance and its audience be ascribed specific values? If so, what kind of values are they and how can they be described? Are different values to be gained, depending on the structure of the performance and how the immanent process evolves? Can theater performances that lack the possibility to create an immanent process in the exchange between the performance and its audience, be given a general value, and those performances that do encourage it, be given another? Should performances with a multilayered structure that build on superimpositions, be given a higher value, for that reason alone? Can a performance, where immanence occurs in the exchange between performance and audience, thereby enabling an experience of becoming, be described as more ethical?

*Interview 19* can actually be seen as a continuation of the essay *The Rhythm of Thinking*. It continues and deepens the reasoning around esthetics and ethics by connecting it to the notion of participation, and to a political outlook. The interview ends in a somewhat conclusive mode, but also introduces some themes that have *not* been discussed elsewhere, like for example, the aspect of making theater for young audiences.

As previously mentioned, there are, at certain points in the text, and mainly in connection to the more detailed descriptions, links to examples from the documentations of the performances.<sup>5</sup><div class="footnote"><sup>5</sup> As the questions and thought lines running through these different materials are, to say the least, very much related I encourage the reader to move between the different layers, especially between the reflexive apparatus and the documentations.</div> They are edited and positioned to illustrate what is being talked about. But the documentations are also accessible in full, and in different versions. The reason for including more than one version is because the performances are all different. Their materiality and expression are dependent on chance procedures and improvisation and since this aspect is central to the reasoning, it is important to have the possibility to compare. There are four documentations of performances of *John and the Mushrooms*, four documentations of performances of *Ryoanji – A Meeting*, and four different movements that together make up the performance of *vorschläge*.<sup>6</sup><div class="footnote"><sup>6</sup> The performance of *vorschläge* does not exist in different versions.</div>

## Defining the fields of tension – Methodology    
The image that could function as the critical core of this whole work is the image of the individual subject within the collective. It is an image of many singulars and the contours of each and every subject, although traceable, is clearly a coming together of the creative collective, the audience, and their combined formation. However, even if this image is constructive to keep in mind throughout, it does not generate the necessary impetus for the reasoning to move forward. Instead, it is essential to locate what I think of as the *fields of tension* that emerge between things. And in order to locate and define these fields, we need to start by looking at how the things are constituted.

To call them “things” is not really sufficient, and to think of them as poles, even if it makes sense as it implies that there is a tension, might indicate that they are solid, which they are not. They are *compounds of energies; of diverse intensions and desires*. I suggest that there are five of them. In the reasoning they are thoroughly intertwined and codependent and it would be disconfirmatory to the critical mode to put them in some kind of hierarchical order, but in the following I will describe how they are formed and how their interrelatedness constitutes the critical methodology.

The performer - and subsequently their togetherness – is filled with different energies and desires; to create, to collaborate, to use her skills, to develop his insights, and many other ones. To see the performers as one compound should only be understood as confirmative of their common position as creators and presenters of the expression, and as working under the same circumstances. In the reasoning, they constitute one highly dynamic coherent unit, but the ineffable diversity of energies inherent in this group is important to keep in mind.

Another compound is the material itself. Not the bodies or voices of the performers, but instead what could be seen as the hardware: the conceptual grid, the musical compositions, the texts and the scenography, that is used in the performances. This group of materials exerts a force of its own that has to be complied with. It has its own expressive intent which, when put together, forms the circumstances – rules, restrictions, possibilities – for how the expression is shaped and for how the different components relate.

The third compound is the full performative event, the meeting between the expression of the performance and the audience. To see this meeting as a compound is to emphasize perception as a central issue. It creates a focus on the individual in the activity of sensing and creating meaning, and highlights if her sense is one of belonging to a community. In other words, this compound assembles all the experiential aspects.

The forth compound is made up of the diverse and divergent energies within myself. It encapsulates my esthetics, my convictions and initiative (to choose and set in motion the material), my skills and inabilities, my history and my longings. Yes, all the reasons for doing what I am doing.

The fifth compound is also steered by me, formed by the conglomerate of critical tools used in the analysis. This compound encapsulates the decision of how to position the critical gaze, and the choice of the transdisciplinary connections to be made. Hence, it defines the critical domain and its relation to existing critique. In its limitations, this compound is firmly attached to the overall esthetics, even if it is installed somewhat to provoke.

So, the five “things” are: The energies of the performer(s); the force of the material; the perceptive dynamic of the full event; the injection of my own personal energy, esthetic intent and conviction; and the choices and activation of the critical discourses. It is not necessary, or even possible, to illuminate all the different layers of energies that these things represent. *What is necessary is to locate and acknowledge them and to activate the tension that ensues when they are critically merged.* Then the fields of tension occur, and it is these fields that constitute the core grid of the reasoning. They generate the necessary impetus for the critical activity, and as such they constitute the methodology for the investigation. An example of a reoccurring field of tension – just to give a clearer picture – is what is generated inbetween the restrictions of the concepts on which the performances are based, and the feelings and opinions within the performer when complying with those limits/restrictions. Another, crucial field of tension throughout the reasoning, is the tension that occurs between the notion of a directorial practice as decisive for the expressive output, and the presence of chance and indeterminacy.

To delineate the compounds of energies and to locate the fields of tension might imply that they are occurrences and phenomena that are somewhat stable which, of course, they are not. Not only are they in constant flux – the compounds as well as the fields – but they also operate outside the unavoidable limitations of my gaze. In this complexity, can anything be considered stable? Is stability necessary for a critique to find its vigor? Yes, I think so. And my suggestion – which is the proposed axis around which the critical operations rotate – is that the only thing that can be stable is an ethics. Even if the definition of ethics, that I will propose, is processual, i.e. continuously moving forward, it carries the modality of conviction; experimentally searching for what life can be, not judging or selecting.

In order to move into the exploration and heat up the fields of tension we need to examine how the critical gaze is positioned, which analytical perspectives are chosen, and which terms and concepts are used and expanded upon.

## Processing process - Analytical perspectives
>How, from its just-beginnings in bare activity, can an experience modulate its own self-formative tendency’s going beyond itself, toward a potentializing of other events? Since foundational clearness and distinctness are (fortunately for creativity) out of the question, it is a given that no event can lay down the law in a way that essentially predefines its succession.

>Brian Massumi

The fields of tension encapsulate and cause processes of differing nature. This is clear and significant. Processes of creation, processes of preparation, processes of thinking, of self-organizing, processes of collaboration, processes of perception, processes of creating meaning, of problematizing, processes of interaction and of relations unfolding, processes of co-composing, and processes of becoming. Some of these processes are more solid since they include human relations, others more concealed, evolving in an inner world. Some of them belong to the creative situation and some to a perception process, *and* they are reciprocal. Even more important, in regards to in which dynamic milieu these processes unfold, is that some are *consciously enhanced and exposed as an expressive part of the performance*. Consequently, the analytical perspectives are not chosen solely for their coherency when problematizing and untangling all these different types of processes, but also because they are rooted in and affirmative of a *process ontology*. This is a term that cannot be disconnected from the philosophical discourse of *process philosophy* (the two terms will occur interchangeably in this reasoning, but there is a point to staying with the former as it ties the reasoning, more concretely, to the corporeality of the performances). And as process philosophy, in different ways, influences the thinking of my main theoretical references  - Gillez Deleuze, Brian Massumi, Rosi Braidotti – it is reasonable to say that it is *a broadened definition of process philosophy* that will be used in the investigation. The choice of analytical perspective is, more or less entirely, influenced and inspired by the nature of the material and the structures of the concepts that were used when creating the performances. This correlation is multilayered, but it can simply be said that the analytical perspective is chosen because it is confirmative and – more importantly – thoroughly critically aware of an esthetic that places processes as the main objective for both creation and perception.

A more precise definition of process philosophy and coherency as an analytical discourse will evolve concurrently with its application in my reasoning, but I will preliminarily outline its most important and relevant characteristics.

Contrary to an epistemology that starts with a knowing subject observing and describing the world, process philosophy places being – ontology – as the foundational premise for the analysis.<sup>7</sup><div class="footnote"><sup>7</sup> Process philosophy is primarily associated with the American philosopher Alfred North Whitehead (1861-1947), but also with philosophers like Samuel Alexander (1859-1938), CS Pierce (1839-1883), John Dewey (1859-1952), William James (1842-1910), and Charles Hartshorne (1897-2000), which firmly places it in 20th century North America. Both Brian Massumi and Gilles Deleuze mainly connect to the theories of Alfred North Whitehead (though Massumi quite extensively also relies on/ refers to William James). What is interesting in this framework is that Brian Massumi, through the thinking of William James, connects Whitehead to the philosophical school of American Pragmatism and in the text *Cage Interpreted and Performed*, I try to clarify the relationship between John Cage and American Pragmatism (Massumi 2011).</div>  A subject-object polarity is then less relevant and instead process philosophy formulates an ontology whereby relations continually and constantly emerge anew. Everything is in a perpetual becoming, difference and the singular is acknowledged, and multiplicity is set free. There is no real beginning; life – and thinking – must be seen as always and continuously in the middle (Deleuze and Guttari 2004 It is useful, in this investigative context, to think of how a process ontology effaces the idea that relations can be disjunctive; they are always in transition. It then follows that the general condition of activity in the world is *not* one of chaos. Consequently all binary relations are eliminated, all opposites erased, and change is seen as continuous transformations saturated with potentiality. This turns chaos into the quasi-chaotic (Massumi 2011).

Process philosophy, especially how it is explicated in the reasoning of Brian Massumi (carving out what he defines as an activist philosophy), holds concepts and terms that will be quite concretely attached to the creative and perceptive situations the performances present – like potentiality, co-composition, relation-of-nonrelation, and becoming. But a concept that, for both Massumi and Deleuze, functions as a dynamic unit, like an arc that frames the unfolding inherent in a process ontology, is the concept of the event. Even if that concept is not going to play a central role in the continued reasoning it is worth looking at as it exposes how process philosophy takes off from the idea of the unformed (expression/experience) – which is something of an esthetic-perceptive condition in the performances, as well as in my critical exposition.

In his book *Semblance and Event, Activist Philosophy and the Occurrent Art* (2011) – a rich and extensive work on merging philosophical discourses with theories on perception and esthetics – Brian Massumi enters into his reasoning and definition of activist philosophy through Alfred North Whitehead’s definition of process philosophy.<sup>8</sup> <div class="footnote"><sup>8</sup> “That *how* an actual entity becomes continues what that actual entity is; so that the two descriptions of an actual entity are not independent. Its “being” is constituted by its ‘becoming’. This is the principle of process” (Whitehead, 1929, 23).</div> In dialogue with Whitehead, and certainly also with Gilles Deleuze, Massumi formulates, or maybe one could say traces, a kind of three-dimensional map of the unfolding of all occurrences. The precondition is that everything in the world is in a continuous becoming and the nucleus of this movement is the unfolding of the event. Massumi (2011) takes off from the idea of a state that is encapsulated in the principle of *unrest*. I understand this state as the unruly movement of the world’s general activity, and in that movement Massumi locates a kind of starting point (for the forming of the expression/experience), that he calls *bare activity*. This is an “inaugural moment of indecision between the already-going-on-around and the taking-in-to-new-effect, before the culmination of this occurrence has sorted out just what occasion it will have been” (Massumi 2011, 2). This, in turn, is the initial stage of the event, of the process; the “just-beginning-to-stir of the event coming into its newness out of the soon to be prior background activity it will have left creatively behind” (Massumi 2011, 3). Here we can see the arc of the event that “carries it through its phases to a culmination all its own: a dynamic unity no other event can have in just this way” (Massumi 2011, 3). Conceived by Gillez Deleuze (and Felix Guattari) the complexity of the event is shown in the tangled treatment it is put through in their last book together *What is Philosophy?* (1994) At one point, moving from the notion of the virtual and how it, through a process of immanence, rises from chaos and finds its consistency, Deleuze and Guattari say that an event is formed as an entity “ on a plane of immanence that sections the chaos. This is what we call the Event, or the part that eludes its own actualization in everything that happens. The event is not the state of affairs. It is actualized in a state of affairs, in a body, in a lived, but it has a shadowy and secret part that is continually subtracted from or added to its actualization: in contrast with the state of affairs, it neither begins nor ends but has gained or kept the infinite movement to which it gives consistency” (Deleuze and Guattari, 1994, 156).

The event should be understood as a micro sequence, an unfolding happening in the shortest moment, but Massumi’s different formulations and gaze on the concept hold different perspectives too, which allows for understanding the dynamic of the unfolding as transferable to sequences on another scale, *and* to how it relates; both regarding event to event and to what can be understood as a perceiving mind: “The unfolding of the event cannot but be felt. Each phase of the event must in some way perceive the pertinence of the phase before it, in order to gather the prior phase’s momentum into its own unfolding. Even as it does this, it is already anticipating a subsequent phase, to which it will in turn relay the momentum of the event’s occurrence. The phases of occurrence overlap as they relay each other following an arc of felt becoming” (Massumi, 2011, 3). This feeling of the events unfolding is always in the now, it cannot be otherwise, but it is an experience of the “internal totalities of an always variable past” (Deleuze 1994, 287).<sup>9</sup><div class="footnote"><sup>9</sup> The concept of time, within critique, is not often a time of coexistence, since its impetus is analysis. Should that be considered a fact? Or, is it possible to pose the question of how (and if) the act of critical rendering can strive towards a time of coexistence, a time that does not exclude the before and after, but superimposes the two? Deleuze would probably say that it is a question of composition.</div> Which also can be described as though the event, that is about to unfold, takes a dose of the world’s surrounding general activity and makes it into its own special activity (Massumi 2011). The movement of the event and the phenomena of becoming are present – unfolding, emerging – without any attention paid to it. However, the treatment, or rather activation, they are given in the thinking of Massumi is as active parts of human experience. They are acknowledged as central in perceptive sequences and – which is more apparent in some instances than in others – closely tied to the experience of art, or maybe one should say, distinguished and problematized within the tension between ongoing life and art experience.

Understandably, this can seem like an ungraspable cascade of concepts and terms, but for the moment it only needs to be understood as signifying two important aspects. First, that a process ontology illuminates the intricacy of perception, and secondly that process philosophy is “at no remove from life’s immediacy” (Massumi 2011, 1). Implicitly, this means that process philosophy cannot breathe without an ongoing reevaluation and reinvention of its relation to lived experience. If this is clear in Deleuze’s thinking, it comes across even more so in Massumi’s extensions.

## Immanence and adjunctive terms
If a process ontology is the tacit foundation for this exploration, it is through the concept of immanence and  “processes of immanence” that the creative activities will be looked at and function as the critical instigator. It is certainly not only in process philosophy that the concept of immanence is central, but since this is not the place to give an overview of its use and implications for philosophy in general, I will outline its meaning more or less exclusively by following Gillez Deleuze, whose thinking permeates this work as a whole. I will also sketch out how it will be inserted in the analysis of the creative and perceptive situations, but the more specific meaning of the concept of immanence – i.e. its force and function in this particular context – will be explicated in the description of the performances and in the essays.

The concept of immanence – or the plane of immanence – is central and reoccurring in the thinking of Gilles Deleuze. It is the condition, the actual criteria for what constitutes philosophy, as the plane of immanence is the foundation for thinking as such: “it is a plane of immanence that constitute the absolute ground of philosophy, its earth or deterriorialization, the foundation on which it creates its concepts” (Deleuze and Guattari 1994, 41). This can also be understood as philosophy “operates on the plane of immanence and through ‘forms’ that are themselves immanent to the plane (they do not ‘arrive’ from ‘elsewhere’)” (O’Sullivan 2006, 111). For Deleuze immanence constitutes being as such, therefore immanence can be said to begin with the certainty that there is just one stream of life or one plane of being. It is not a plane of perception enclosed inside the human mind, but a perpetual movement, a dynamic and open flow of becoming. It is through the lens of immanence that Deleuze reads and establishes connection with other thinkers and discourses within the field of philosophy, as well as, within the field of art.<sup>10</sup><div class="footnote"><sup>10</sup> It is also relevant to note that the concept of immanence is important for Deleuze when his thinking enters into the fields of sociology, psychology and politics. </div> As such, it could be described as a gaze that functions as an incursive strategy when entering into philosophical analysis, its conditions, terms and concepts. However, the concept of immanence does not only operate on multiple levels but could also be said to have a double purpose: on the one hand, it functions as an ontologically grounding term, and on the other hand, it constitutes a resistance against philosophical discourses that are not rooted in perpetually moving lived experiences, thus it opposes the idea that “the world is simply there, or transcendent, only to be viewed by the human knower” (Colebrook 2002, 69). In the book *What is Philosophy?* (Deleuze and Guattari 1994), the description of the plane of immanence goes through an indepth examination of what constitutes a concept, as such. This is a necessary progression since concepts are created out of language and immanence is not. Hence, a description, of a concept like immanence, must precede the (any) critical treatment. So, since immanence is thinking *before* conceptualization – which is the reason it cannot be a method – we are faced with an unavoidable contradiction manifested already in the use of the term, since it would not occur without thinking.

Deleuze sees the creation of concepts as an activity specific to philosophy. Though, the concepts that philosophy creates should not be understood as abstract terms or representations, or even less so, as general units referring to universal entities. Rather, in order to activate a vital thinking they need to be grounded in experience, in what Deleuze calls intensities, and they need to be constantly reevaluated and reconfigured. The inner condition of thinking as such - and life itself – is, according to Deleuze, a perpetual and infinite movement. It is not something that starts from an immobile point. Instead, Deleuze “insists that we need to begin from a mobility, flux, becoming or change that has no underlying foundation, which he refers to as the ‘plane of immanence’” (Colebrook 2002, 52). This is why it is important not to confuse the plane of immanence with the concept, i.e. not to make it a concept that lies behind other concepts but instead understand it as an infinite and absolute substrate necessary for thinking to ensue: “The plane of immanence is neither a concept nor the concept of all concepts. If one were to be confused with the other there would be nothing to stop concepts from forming a single one or becoming universals and losing their singularity, and the plane would also lose its openness” (Deleuuze and Guattari 1994, 35). Even if Deleuze claims that “the plane of immanence must be regarded as prephilosophical” it has to be “laid out” (Deleuuze and Guattari 1994, 40). And how this instituting – of the plane of immanence – is done, mirrors the history of philosophy. We could, therefore, say that it is the choices that are made, when formulating how to make critical use of the infinite movement of the plane of immanence, that constitute a philosophical discourse. But such an image inevitably generates the question: *what* is the plane of immanence instituted to? The answer given by Deleuze (and Guattari) is chaos; a movement “characterized less by the absence of determinations than by the infinite speed with which they take shape and vanish” (Deleuuze and Guattari 1994, 42). In chaos there are no connections, chaos generates chaos and infinitely undoes every consistency. On that plane of infinite speed, of disconnection, disappearance and inconsistency, it is the concepts that create consistency, a bind and dependency: “By making a section of chaos, the plane of immanence requires a creation of concepts” (Deleuze and Guattari 1994, 42).

It is impossible to disentangle the concept of transcendence from this dynamic. If immanence works like a sieve, giving, through its concepts, consistency to chaos, a transcendent force, in turn, obstructs the fluidity of immanence by placing something that immanence is immanent to. This “something” has changed over history but has always been a term outside life itself, a higher force, such as the foundation of God, Subjectivity or Matter. This constructs a two-world view, a duality where a world beyond the world is created. Deleuze see this polarity as the major error of Western philosophy, and in his last text *Immanence: A Life* he calmly states that immanence “is not related to Some Thing as a unity superior to all things or to a Subject as an act that brings about a synthesis of things: it is only when immanence is no longer immanence to anything other than itself that we can speak of a plane of immanence” (Deleuze 2001, 27). Eliminating this duality between immanence and transcendence eradicates the idea of a two-world view, of life coming from somewhere other than from the movement of life itself, and in this modern moment, even if the obstruction caused by transcendent rulers will never vanish, Deleuze insists that we are no longer satisfied with thinking immanence as immanent to transcendence, instead “we want to think transcendence within the immanent, and it is from immanence that a breach is expected” (Deleuuze and Guattari 1994, 47). But as transcendence is an outcome of thinking – the creation of concepts – it can be said to be, continuously, a product of immanence. Produced by human thought, transcendence cannot stop itself from interpreting immanence as immanent to something, like the great object of contemplation, or a reflecting, deconstructing subject. Conclusively, Deleuze’s notion of the plane of immanence, cannot be understood as specifically defined as an opposition to its traditional opposite; transcendence.

If this outlook on the concept of immanence is placed outside thinking, as such, we arrive at an understanding of the term that is descriptive of a process that grows from within and becomes, as it is made. It is inherent within the physical world of things, of animals and humans, in social interaction and communication, as well as, in nature. It is a plane not related to divine energies. Immanence is everywhere: within each discrete being, as well as on the plane of the whole, in which they participate. But now, approaching the question of how the concept of immanence – as developed by Deleuze – can be transferred and used in an investigation and analysis of theater, we need to start linking the concept of immanence with relational qualities and collective expressional activity. This will (as we shall see more concretely when moving into the analysis of the performances) entail a partial reinstatement of the polarity between immanence and transcendence, not as opposites, but as two contradictory yet communicating planes.

The reinstatement of this polarity stems both from how the collective creation is instigated, as well as from the conceptual construct of the performances.<sup>11</sup><div class="footnote"><sup>11</sup> It would also be possible to say that the system of production, understood as the structural restrains that the institutions in which the performances are produced and presented – hence dependent on – exerts a transcendent force. The production situations for the performances were different, in many aspects, but in regards to the transcendent influence of an institutional production apparatus, the production of *John and the Mushrooms* was made in quite conservative and hierarchical circumstances, and the other two were produced in a more free group situation, hence the nature of the transcendent influence – production wise – varied and the hindrances for a truly immanent process therefore took on different dynamics. However, the cultural production system that all three were a part of  - and which the performances partly intended to question - neither had an interest in, nor the capacity to allow a truly immanent force to guide the process, since their existence is all about implementing an economical-political ordering. This type of cultural-political analytical gaze will not be applied in this work. </div> Activities are set in motion through a transcendent force and different levels of hierarchy are prevalent. How to understand this will be discussed throughout, but initially it can be said that the attempt to performatively activate the concept of immanence is trapped within a reality steered by energies that oppose its presence.  Immanence, or the immanent energy, is in these reflections therefore, defined in relation ‘to’ something (that is not), and this notion – or rather instrumentalist way of inserting the concept – is dubious and pointed out by Deleuze when he says that whenever “immanence is interpreted as immanent ‘to’ something a confusion of plane and concept results, so that the concept becomes a transcendent universal and the plane becomes an attribute in the concept. When misunderstood this way, the plane of immanence revives the transcendent again: it is a simple field of phenomena that now only possess in a secondary way that which first of all is attributed to the transcendent unity” (Deleuze and Guattari 1994, 44). Instead of letting this observation stymie the critique, we just need to carry it with us – as un underlying critical substrate – when instituting and utilizing the dynamics of immanence in the limited and specific way, as intended here: as a critical tool examining the creative flow in a collective creative situation. In their ongoing work to explore the conditions for artistic practices to engage in philosophical thinking, Erin Manning and Brian Massumi delineate and activate the concept of immanence. They find its usefulness in the fact that an “immanent critique engages with new processes more than new products, from a constructivist angle. It seeks to energize new modes of activity, already in gem, that seem to offer a potential to escape or overspill ready-made channelings into the dominant value system. The strategy of immanent critique is to inhabit one’s complicity and make it turn – in the sense in which butter ‘turns’ to curd” (Manning, Massumi, 2014, 87).

The specific meaning of the concept of immanence in this particular framework will be explicated throughout, but an initial understanding of its force and function should commence with the observation that what all three performances have in common is that the expressive outcome of the collective creation grows from within, and is determined by intuitive creative inventions made by each individual performer.<sup>12</sup><div class="footnote"><sup>12</sup> In/when/by exchanging the word invention with improvisation, it should be noted that creative processes, where improvisation is used as an important part, are not in any way rare. Different modes of improvisation are continually present in the making of theater: as a method in the developmental stages of a piece, or as a discrete part of a performance, or simply as a necessary flexibility to accommodate all those small shifts every performance entails. One could actually claim that, to a greater or lesser degree, unprepared decisions are demanded from performers in all performative situations, even in strictly formatted ones. The concept of improvisation will not be used much or thoroughly problematized in this work, even if its presence is undeniable.</div> The concept of immanence – an immanent energy – is thus meant to signify that the creative expression is set in motion through the judgment of the individual performer, and that each expressional form emanates from a personal initiative/action, which in turn is influenced by the stimuli that is perceived. An immanent creative process is not necessarily set in motion with a specific intention but becomes through making. It is open and indeterminate within the restraints of its different parts (participants), and space, but not in time. The immanent process is a generative energy that could be tacit but never petrified, therefore in perpetual variation. It is immanent because the development of the collective expression – over and through time – is not decided or rehearsed: it emanates from within the collective process and gets its momentum from each performer’s initiative (impulse, reaction, answer, judgment). In other words, an immanent creative energy is a term that describes a process of instantaneous and indeterminate building of an expressive form within a group of performers.

Even if the relational aspects of being on a plane of immanence must be regarded as crucial, since all life develops (creates itself) from and in relation to an immanent force, the immanent force is not *dependent* on any kind of exchange between beings. Processes of immanence are continually happening. Though, in this framework, the concept of immanence is constituted by a mode of exchange between expressions and humans simultaneously present in space and time, hence corresponding to how relations emerge. This allows for activating the concept of immanence as a critical/philosophical discourse in the analysis of the performance situation as a *whole*, i.e. in the critical treatment of processes and energies that evolve in and between everybody present: the performers involved in the collective creative process and the audience; all encapsulated in the duration of the performative event. An immanent process, as I intend to define and use it, is a process both of an emerging creation, happening as an exchange between the performers, as well as an exchange between the expression of the performance and its audience.

In order to make critical use of such a definition, it is necessary, as I have indicated above, to employ quite a few adjunctive concepts and terms. Three of these – *univocity*, *co-composition* and *relation-of-nonrelation* – are central to this thesis, and need to be outlined. They are not only generated by and contingent on the concept of immanence, but are interlinked and, in my reasoning, dependent on each other. As an indication of their use they should be seen as connected to multiple individual expressive trajectories, superimpositions, expressive polyphony, and overload, as well as to the idea that the expression consolidates through the indeterminate unfolding of multiple expressive relations and not through thorough composition.

The definition of the concept of univocity is very closely connected to Deleuze’s explication of the plane of immanence.<sup>13</sup><div class="footnote"><sup>13</sup> The concept of the rhizome is also closely connected to the concept of immanence and univocity. In innumerous ways, it has been appropriated into contemporary esthetic criticism. I will not use it in this work even if it infuses, on certain levels, interesting ways of looking at the expressive movements. However, it can be kept in mind as an inspirational figuration in conjunction with my reasoning around multiple and simultaneous expressive trajectories and the production of meaning. Deleuze’s exposition of the concept of the rhizome comes mainly from the book *A Thousand Plateaus* (2004/1987), written together with Felix Guattari, where it is extrapolated on and inserted as a critical tool into fields like language, politics and psychology. A ‘full’ understanding of the concept is only accessible when understood as a part of Deleuze’s thinking as a whole. However, briefly, a rhizomatic structure is a structure that branches out in multiple (infinite) directions. In a rhizome there is no hierarchy of root, trunk and branch - it is not like a staircase, where you have to take the first step before you move onto and reach the next. The rhizome shoots in all directions, its transversal, with no beginning and no end. It is always inbetween, with openings in other directions and places. Applied to thinking, the rhizome is a nomadic thought process. It is neither innate nor stirred by the reassuring familiarity of encounters with the known. Thinking rhizomatically is a process that overrides all known categories; it is not the application of a method, but rather an involuntary activity that takes place when the mind is provoked by an encounter with the unknown and the unpredictable. The concept of the rhizome used in discourses like perception psychology provokes prevailing ideas on how our society looks at education and the notion of experience, growing and learning as a process of accumulation. “The rhizome operates by variation, expansion, conquest, capture, offshoots. Unlike the graphic arts, drawing, or photography, unlike tracings, the rhizome pertains to a map that must be produced, constructed, a map that is always detachable, connectable, reversible, modifiable, and has multiple entryways and exits and its own lines of flight. … In contrast to centered (even polycentric) systems with hierarchical modes of communication and preestablished paths, the rhizome is an acentered, nonhierarchical, non-signifying system without a General and without an organizing memory or central automation, defined solely by a circulation of states” (Deleuze and Guattari, 1987, 23). </div> The complexity of this concept develops out of a discourse on difference, real difference – non-binary difference – and subsequently a non-hierarchical outlook on being (a univocal Being). A compressed understanding of univocity can be gained by placing it opposite to representation. In a representative mode difference is inherent in concepts of a numerically distinct nature. But according to Deleuze, difference lies in the intensities of singularities and representation, even when it introduces concepts of infinite variability (into numerical distinctions) it offers no distinction of substances because there is no possibility of breaking through the limitations of the concept, to reach univocity. Concepts functioning as universal definitions crush the differences of infinite singularities but “the essential in univocity is not that Being is said in a single and same sense, but that it is said, in a single and same sense, *of* all its individuating differences or intrinsic modalities.” (Deleuze, 1968, 36) In this work, univocity is introduced in the text *The Rhythm of Thinking* and describes the overload (of impressions) which is placed upon the perceptive mind.

In the same essay I quite extensively use the term *vision of the subject* to investigate the relationship between dramaturgy and ethics. This term is retrieved from Rosi Braidotti, and the specific meaning and range of definition that I give it will emerge through the reasoning in the essay, but for an initial understanding it should be seen as tied to an immanent ontological approach. The subject in an immanent ontology is a nonunitary, constantly evolving subject. It is a subject coming into – and experiencing – being through relations unfolding through time. Combining this notion of the subject with the notion of a vision, is, as I choose to see it, to envision the inherent *possibilities* for (life-) movements when no transcendent force is acknowledged. Within this mode of existence there is nothing that separates the subject from its power to act, and ethics becomes, following Braidotti, an ethical pragmatism that rejects the idea that the object of ethical inquiry is a subjective individualistic core that represents a moral intention or rational consciousness, but instead assigns it to the effects each individual’s actions have upon others in the world. The vision of the subject, so to speak, signifies the affirmation of the potential in a constantly evolving subject and all the relations that emerge. It is “a kind of ethical pragmatism, which defines ethics as a practice that cultivates affirmative modes of relation, active forces, and values” (Bradotti 2011, 300). The ethico-esthetic application of the term is, simply put, when the compositional and dramaturgical structure confirms and relates to each individual involved – in the making and sharing the performance – as being in a constant becoming. This elusive relationship will, as said, be further explicated when placed in the concreteness of the performative situations.

A way to describe the term co-composition is to start from its main component – composition. The term is first and foremost descriptive of the assembling of materials into three-dimensional time-based performances. As such, it can be seen as relating to established compositional methodologies. In light of my different esthetic decisions, and in view of a process oriented ontology one would assume that the concept of composition should be abandoned, and exchanged with a concept that exudes less stability. There are two reasons why this is not done. The theater performances that function as references, even if the concepts on which they are built aim at undermining its means of production, do not succeed in deconstructing them into non-performances. Rather, the conceptual setups exert a strong compositional thinking that to a certain extent sustains the notion of the performance as an artifact. The second reason is a direct outcome of this observation since, as we shall see, all modes of creation presented through the collective processes become stable, clearly delineated compositions. However, the notion of composition takes on a far more fluent and elusive character when activated within the perceptive dynamic and expanded into the concept of co-composition. Co-composition is the perceptive activity of linking impressions (of all kinds and in all situations). It is experience inventing, experience  “always invents. Every perception is a creative activity culminating in the production of an event of change. A perception is its own event. Its ‘content’ is one with the dynamic form of its coming to fulfillment. What a perception invents is essentially itself. It is self-creative. There is nothing ‘outside’ to which it corresponds or that it reflects or represents. All perception is immanent – in the case of animal life, to the bodily milieu of its own becoming” (Massumi 2011, 27). To acknowledge this force of invention – which I will refer to as co-composition, and sometimes co-creation – is to regard the task of directing as the creation of the circumstances in which this can happen. What this really means is that the performances find their value through the investment of the perceiver: they become an experience through co-composition. Along with the directorial idea/decision that it is the circumstances for an experience of co-composition that should be created, there is an awareness that a “foundational clearness and distinctness are (fortunately for creativity) out of the equation” and it is a given that the performative event “can lay down the law in a way that essentially predefines its succession. But are there still ways in which an experience can *orient* what comes? In what way can an event constructively include formative potential for what lies beyond in its own constitution?” (Massumi 2011, 14). This is the core question, in its many possible extensions, that is under investigation in this work. A creative initiative is taken. It is based on the idea of process, and process through all aspects of creation, as well as perception and when placing the concept of process as a foundational condition, the notion of meaning – clear and distinct - is left open. But since the performances are made as contributions with a specific intent (actually clear and distinct) the dramaturgical challenge, which is what ties it to the question Brian Massumi poses, is how these processes can be shaped in a way that *“orient”* the experience, or more acutely: How were they shaped to “include formative potential for what lies beyond in its own constitution?” An esthetics aligned with process ontology and co-composition should be understood as aligned with its idea of *being as becoming*. This is a universal outlook where individual beings exist but only as the outcome of becomings, that is, irreversible processes of individuation (Delanda 2013). Being is the process of becoming and the “co-composing of formative forces constitutes in each exercise of experience a novel *power of existence*: a power to become” (Massumi 2011, 12). The complex idea, or process, of being as becoming will be investigated at different points in this work: in connection to the production of meaning, the movement of thinking, and to vitality affect. (Stern 2004)

The term *relation-of-nonrelation* is utilized as a kind of esthetic condition and perceptive circumstance important both for understanding the dramaturgical construct of the performances, as well as for the critical reasoning. This is a term that, in this reasoning, is firmly attached to the concept of univocity, as well as to co-composition, and should be understood as reverberating throughout. The term is central to the thinking of Brian Massumi and it refers to the unfolding of the event and its perceptive effect. He extracts and develops it through the discourse of activist philosophy (which, as said, he explores mainly through the thinking of Alfred North Whitehead). Massumi’s reasoning is complicated, but a shortcut into its relevance to the dramaturgical construct of the performance, and to what Massumi carves out as his main point, is that the elements contributing to an occurrence are in themselves disparate. If they are in tension “it is precisely as a function of the differential between their positions. … The factors do not actually connect” (Massumi 2011, 20). There is a paradox embedded in the term relation-of-nonrelation as it excludes what is commonly called interaction or interactivity from qualifying as relational, and instead regards relations as *not connective*. This non-connectiveness does not, obviously, equal the effacement of relations but instead it is what produces the concept of relation-of-nonrelation, which should then be understood as, all “techniques of existence operate through relations-of-nonrelations” (Massumi, 2011, 144). Connecting this to the above exposition of the concept of the event, Massumi says that the phrase relation-of-nonrelation is a way “of holding together, in the concept of the event, the differential status of its conditioning elements and the dynamic unity of their sheer occurrence as a little absolute” (Massumi 2011, 21).

If we apply this concept to what occurs between occasions of experience, there is no fusion of a homogeneous kind. Ínstead there is always a disjunction, and simply nothing is non-relational. The consequence is that occasions of experience *“cannot be said to actually connect to each other”* (Massumi 2011, 21). This is a paradox since we experience, and claim, that occurrences do coalesce. However, only in the sense of being mutually enveloped in a sequence in which change and differentials are held together through a creative perceptive process. That situates this term in the dramaturgical and perceptive thinking, and exemplifies its operational intent: it will be made use of as descriptive – and affirmative – of how a multitude of disparate expressive trajectories are thought of as the fertile ground for co-composition. To further an understanding of how I use the term relation-of-nonrelation – as well as explicate its political potential – is to acknowledge that it enables a reevaluation of relations that rely on established cultural codifications of what relations "are," and how they are constituted (socially, esthetically, politically).

Conclusively, we arrive at a point where the prerequisites for the critical exploration are: a process oriented ontology; immanence as a creative circumstance/energy; univocity as a non-hierarchical view of being; co-composition as an experience of becoming; relation-of-nonrelation as the grounding for the re-evaluation of compositional (and social) relations; and a vision of the subject as outlinig an ethics. With the help of these, undoubtedly reconfigured definitions, I will look at the creative and perceptive processes, attach them to concrete experiences, and hopefully deepen the understanding of their critical function and relevance.

## Philosophy in Practice and Representation

The extensive philosophical references and particularly to the thinking of Gilles Deleuze, should not be regarded as a philosophical endeavour. The philosophical theories made use of here, are not really scrutinized or placed in a harsh critical light, or extensively illuminated through the thinking of other philosophers and critics. This is not a work that deals with philosophical queries, but rather questions concerning composition, dramaturgy and affect, *within the confinements of a theatrical experience*, and the appropriations are of an instrumental nature. This of course creates friction, and what might be seen as a misconstruction, since process ontology aims at covering "the whole” of life and the attempted transformations into a compositional thinking diminish its scope. But the philosophical grounding is intended to establish an ontological reference, to increase the existential stakes and relevance. It enables a broader and more vibrant contact between the sharp demarcation of the performances and the world in which they are placed, and I see it as a precondition for the inquiry into how the perceptive dynamic, beyond semantic language, can evolve. Consequently, we need to understand that the thinking should, in an overall sense, be mainly seen as a structural critique, and as an attempt to extract observations that can be used to extend it beyond the specificities of the performances.

What all this means is that the references to philosophical discourses are less concerned with "getting it right" but more an attempt to create alliances and finding points of compatibility. For example, Deleuzean theories are used as a tool for furthering the dramaturgical investigation, and a more intense probing into the performances. Therefore the reasoning suffers from the fallacy of consolidation: expressive phenomena, perceptive sequences, relational dynamics, everything that makes up the performances is placed in an adjunctive position to the philosophical discourse, and searches for possible ways of engaging with its inner reasoning. To insert and activate only parts of the Deluzian (and Deluzian/ Guattarian) complex thought structure is, and maybe rightly so, sometimes criticized by philosophers and philosophical thinkers as a distortion, because “no single discourse, indeed no single component of their work, may be pulled out and used as an optic through which to view the whole” (Buchanan Swiboda 2004, 2). I choose to not see this as a weakness, but instead as something to stay attuned to, and keep in the back of my mind throughout the reasoning. I say this only to emphasize that the appropriations are done without exposing many of the very important threads of thoughts that lead them – thus increasing their stability and complexity – back into the history of thinking. So, an important and useful precondition is, that even if the different philosophical concepts that are used in the critical operations throughout – like the concept of immanence – are grounded in specific philosophical discourses, the undertaking cannot be said to aim at furthering an understanding of Deleuze’s philosophical thinking. Rather the opposite: to make use of his philosophical outlook to examine and describe intricate processes firmly grounded in lived experience. This observation derives first and foremost from the fact that the thinking in this work emerges out of an artistic practice, not a philosophical one. Though, interesting enough, this shift - away from a teleological use towards a perceptional – corresponds, as we shall see, to the philosophical thinking of Deleuze.<sup>14</sup><div class="footnote"><sup>14</sup> This cannot be seen as unique to Deleuze, but rather part of many philosophers’ alignment with phenomenology. This work will not attempt to treat/describe those different strands.</div>

One of the reoccurring references in this exploration is the writing of philosopher and performance studies scholar Laura Cull. Her work has contributed to how the practice of theater can be viewed through Deleuzian thinking, and in her book *Theatres of Immanence, Deleuze and the Ethics of Performance* (2012) she thoroughly examines the possibility to problematize and analyze theater through the notion of immanence, and immanent processes. This book is one of many examples of how the thinking of Deleuze has greatly influenced not only contemporary philosophy, but also, to an almost incomprehensible extent, infused energy into academic discourses outside philosophy. We might even say that the writings of Deleuze are one of the main influences behind what we today designate as interdisciplinarity or transdisciplinarity, which has produced critical branches in many directions. (The production of secondary literature on Deleuze seems to be perpetual, and the sense that something interesting and relevant might be missing, is almost impossible to avoid.) The appropriations of Deleuze’s (and Guattari’s) thinking have also expanded well outside academic criticism, and been pulled into the field of art and art practices. In trying to explain why this is, an initial assumption would be that the multiple and divergent directions in which Deleuze’s philosophical project lays hold of, offer such a large number of ways to enter and connect to his thinking, that in turn requires finding entrance points that are adequate for the specific art practice. But the reason for the numerous appropriations is most likely also due to the fact that Deleuze’s work is filled with references to literature, art, music and theater. So, it is not far-fetched to relate his thinking – on an overall level – to the three dimensional, bodily and durational reality of theater. In his book *The Drama of Ideas*, Martin Puchner even goes so far as to say that “Deleuze is the twentieth-century philosopher who comes closest to recognizing a specifically theatrical strain within modern philosophy” (Puchner 2010, 166).  In the opening chapter of Deleuze’s book *Difference and Repetition* (1994), regarded as the first major text where he develops a truly original and freestanding philosophical thinking, he aligns Friedrich Nietzche with Søren Kirkegaard (even though their differences are insurmountable in other aspects). They are conjoined in their emphasis on movement as central to mediation and in this, Deleuze recognizes theater as a means to move beyond language: “They want to put metaphysics in motion, in action. They want to make it act, and make it carry out immediate acts. It is not enough, therefore, for them to propose a new representation of movement; representation is already mediation. Rather, it is a question of producing within the work a movement capable of affecting the mind outside of all representation; it is a question of making movement itself a work, without interpositions; of substituting direct signs for mediate representations; of inventing vibrations, rotations, whirlings, gravitations, dances or leaps which directly touch the mind. This is the idea of a man of the theatre, the idea of a director before his time.” (Deleuze 1968, 8) It is more than reasonable to think that Deleuze allies himself with the above observation, as the quote points towards the inescapable question of mimesis and to how the idea of representation is almost like a curse, infecting not only artistic expressions but also thinking, depriving us of the sensual. This could be interpreted as if Deleuze’s interest in theater revolves around the question – and problems – of representational esthetics, rather than around theater as such.<sup>15</sup><div class="footnote"><sup>15</sup> The main reference used in this work for looking at how Deleuze related to theater, is his text *One Less Manifesto* (Murray 1997). </div> And if one dares to comprise one possible over-all motive for the reoccurring appropriations of Deleuze’s thinking into the field of art and art making, it should probably be molded on the fact that the core of his critique is the phenomena of representation and the repression of fixity.

The workings and problems of representation are therefore continuously present in my reasoning. At certain points, I discuss it rather explicitly and in relation to the performances, like in the essay *Meeting – Meaning*, but it is lurking, more or less, beneath all the aspects that are treated here. The reason for this is, that to accept a process ontology – confirmative of the ongoing, never stopping processes of thinking and living – is to adhere to a refutation of a representational esthetics. To integrate concepts that are part of this philosophical movement, (in themselves, to some extent in flux) into an analysis of artistic practices that strive toward creating artifacts with a certain degree of fixity, could be seen as disconfirmatory to their inherent dynamic. In this tension lies then the core problem with a representational coding. On the one hand, it is easy to agree that it is “strange that aesthetics (as a science of the sensible) could be founded on what *can* be represented in the sensible.” On the other hand, the unavoidable representational coding of the performer’s bodies (as well as the numerous realistic objects brought into the theatrical expressions) is an important part of the dramaturgical interplay. This double bind is also taken up by Deleuze when he says that maybe “the inverse procedure is not much better, consisting of the attempt to withdraw the pure sensible from representation and to determine it as that which remains once representation is removed (a contradictory flux, for example, or a rhapsody of sensations)” (Deleuze 1994, 56). This is a friction that colors the performances: the workings of a representational coding are consciously counteracted, at the same time as the dramaturgy depends on its perceptive impact.

Of all the critical tools/concepts that are utilized in this work, representation is maybe one of the more concrete, and it makes sense to pull it into the practice of theater and claim its relevance for a discussion around dramaturgy and composition. It somehow belongs there, and is often given a central place in the analysis, with or without its long and winding treatment throughout the history of theater and esthetic criticism. But many of the other terms and concepts that I make use of don’t have such an obvious place within the domain of theater or performance studies, and that aspect should be understood as a need to actually disengage from that domain: It comes from the desire to *not* talk about theater as something that *is*, but as something that can *be* something (else).

## Forerunners
When placing this work in relation to what has been done and what is being done, and so define its field of references and possible contributions, what becomes clear is that the questions reflected on can be connected to a variety of critical fields. This makes it somewhat difficult to construe how it relates to the status of present research. But the multidisciplinary gaze and transdisciplinary methodology is not in any way unusual, instead unavoidable in much of contemporary esthetic criticism (and art practices). In this academic fluidity – combined as it is here with the unruly nature of art making – it is constructive I believe, to treat the esthetics and methods of the actual performances *and* the thought lines in the critical questions and reflections, somewhat separately: the first aspect, traditionally (exclusively) belonging to artistic practices, and the second, to the activity of academic critical practices. This could be seen as a separation between the artistic/esthetic heritage of the performances – an outlook that offers, both historically and from a contemporary point of view, a large number of references – and the sprawling development of esthetic theory surrounding the arts during the last decade. Though, I suggest that my intention is rather the opposite and that this approach – to separate the esthetics and creative methods from the analysis and thinking – aims at bridging the two activities. How is that so? Well, I hope I will be able to show that if the critical approach focuses on structural analysis, the possibility of an increased understanding of the potential inherent in the expression – as a perceptive *extension* outside the corporeal concreteness – can be enhanced. And such an attempt needs a certain critical leeway (separation) in order make way for finding those experiential extensions/openings: They can only be found if the discursive extrapolations are elevated above the circumstances (which is the material, the preconception of what art should be, what happens in perception) and allowed to operate in a speculative mode. In that domain the reflections are stabilized through the chosen discourse – process ontology – and cannot be too concerned with the circumstances *until* it is brought down and confronted with the question of how it effects the structure of the composition. Then the bridge is created.

There are influential theater practitioners who have surrounded their practice with similar thoughts and produced critical reflections and therefore can be taken as examples of artists who concretely reject a separation between a tactile practice and critical reflections. To mention a few who have been inspiring to this work (not all included explicitly) are: Jerzy Grotowsky, Eugeneo Barba, Adrianne Mnouchkine, Berthold Brecht and from Sweden Per Verner Carlsson, Susanne Osten and Ingemar Lindh. They all bring, in different ways, an investigative and research intention to their practice, by striving to apply a complex view of the performative situation, often through a combination of looking at its historical roots and its contemporary validity. As theater artists with a parallel interest in esthetic criticism, they exert an impact on my own work, both generally, as well as in discrete ways.

The performances search for their own way of doing things, and their own type of expression, but they are tied in so many ways, to developments in western theater, music and literature so, of course, they grow from things already made. They are new continuations. The music, art and thinking of American composer John Cage are at the center of this investigative endeavor, both as source material and as an inspirational force. In the chapter *Cage Interpreted and Performed*, I will describe more exactly what that means. However, even though I have felt some connection to his music and esthetic thinking, as a musician and composer, it was not before delving into his texts, interviews with him and critical material written on his art, that it became obvious that many aspects of his esthetic thinking are, deeply, related to my own. What occurred to me was a picture of an artist whose main focus is communication. I came to see the question of how (art-based) communication is created as central to his work; its quality and form, both implicitly and explicitly. But communication is problematic and for Cage it was essential to acknowledge and emphasize the problematic aspects of communication and by doing so criticize the way we communicate. The relationship between life and art, between esthetics and politics is essential in his art-making – or doings, as he would say. Even in his formulations about the circumstances under which he is doing his doings, he emphasizes the relationship between art, the artist and the world outside. One could therefore say that it is the communicative potential of art that he investigates and develops through his inventions. Cage’s writings on art, art theory and philosophy are quite extensive and an essential part of his oeuvre. His often multifaceted and sometimes contradictory standpoints repeatedly express:
* a strong will to demystify the artist and his/her creative activities
* a clear ambition to make art useful as a tool to heighten life experiences
* a will to let questions lead the way

From this I get a picture of an artist who resists both social and artistic hierarchies, who thinks that social change begins with individual change, and who wanted art to create an effect and that this effect should increase human awareness. In addition to the stance described above, I was attracted to how Cage eloquently combined an avant-garde attitude with a strong engagement in social and political questions. In his alignment with an anarchic political stance and his encouragement of individual interpretations, his objection to all types of hierarchies, I see Cage as representing an anti-fundamentalist position that opposed all types of generalizations.

All three performances depend, in different ways, on the work and thinking of Cage. His compositions and text – and methods – are activated. But a further, truly interesting and inspiring aspect of his influence, not connected to the actual making of the performances but instead to the making of these reflections, is that his investigative and open approach to art making has effected the over all mode of this research project, and how it has been conducted. However, to direct the works of Cage contradicts, in part, his philosophies. Collective creation grows strongest from within, with no transcendent force (conductor, director). The perspective of looking at the dynamics of immanence in collective creations could therefore be said to emanate directly from Cage’s own direction.

The common denominators in the performances are methods of chance and improvisation. Music and texts are equal parts of the expressional material, presented through multilayered structures. They are performed in non-proscenium spaces (black boxes), dominated by a non-narrative dramaturgy, and there is a strong presence of a deconstruction – reconstruction sequence.<sup>16</sup><div class="footnote"><sup>16</sup> In the essay *Meeting – Meaning*, I abandon the term non-narrative in favor of what I call the pre-narrative.</div> From a historical perspective, these different qualities and methods have been part of theatrical expressions – separately or together – for a long time, and can mostly be traced back to *Untitled Event* at Black Mountain in 1952, the very famous first Happening that Cage initiated together with artist Robert Rauschenberg, choreographer and dancer Merce Cunningham, pianist David Tudor, critic and architect Buckminster Fuller, the poets M C Richards and Charles Olson and the painters Elaine and Willem de Kooning. Not many descriptions of this event can be found, but Cage says himself, a few years later:

> At one end of the rectangular hall, the long end, was a movie, and at the other end were slides. I was on a ladder delivering a lecture which included slides, and there was another ladder which M.C. Richards and Charles Olson went up at different times… Robert Rauschenberg was playing an old-fashioned phonograph that had a horn…, and David Tudor was playing piano, and Merce Cunningham and other dancers were moving through the audience. Rauschenberg’s pictures (the White Paintings) were suspended above the audience… They were suspended at various angels, a canopy of painting above the audience. I don’t recall anything else except the ritual with the coffee cup. (Fetterman 1996, 35)

The unstructured structure of this event, with independent artistic expressions going on simultaneously without any prepared coordination, could neither be described as a visual collage combining different media into one form, nor could it be described as creating a tableaux vivant, but instead all this was set in motion over time. The *Untitled Event* at Black Mountain soon had a strong influence on compositional thinking among composers, choreographers and other groups of artists working with time-based art. Some examples of artists and theater makers who have been influenced by this esthetic approach, in different ways over the years are: Allan Kaprow, Lygia Clark, Öyvind Fahlström, The Living Theater and Goat Island.<sup>17</sup><div class="footnote"><sup>17</sup> Attempting to make an overview of the influence of *Untitled Event* is an almost ridiculous endeavor, as it carries into so many different directions, and directly into the esthetic development of late modernism. And the list of artists could, of course, be extended. The ones mentioned are only taken up as representing clear known examples, also later referred to in this work.</div> Certainly, Merce Cunningham’s own artistic development, independent of his collaboration with Cage, has to be thought of as strongly influenced. And even if the aspects of chance and indeterminacy have not been in the forefront of contemporary choreography, it is hard to imagine its development without the influence of Cage’s multilayered esthetics. Trisha Brown would be a good example of this. In the development of modern music composition, the compositional strategy of Untitled Event with superimpositions, improvisations, and a questioning of a hierarchy of expressions, took off in many different directions.<sup>18</sup><div class="footnote"><sup>18</sup> It should be noted that the compositional strategy of superimpositions had already been turned into a strong expressive esthetic by Charles Ives (1874-1954), another American composer.</div>  One of the more influential directions - and also related to this work - was the emergence of different compositional tactics that shifted the control away from the composer to the performer, which can be exemplified with the invention of graphic scores (graphic notation).<sup>19</sup><div class="footnote"><sup>19</sup> A way to notate music that is still used by many composers. See Sauer 2008 for an overview of graphic scores.</div> Composers like Earl Brown, Mauricio Kagel and Cornelius Cardew created scores that were open for interpretation, and by doing so persisted in Cage’s attempt to reformulate the creative relationship between the composer and the performer, between the instruction and the result. To widen the gap even further, between the composer’s instruction and the sounding result, some composers started to use textual instructions: semantic language to be transformed into musical expression. The piece *vorschläge* by Mathias Spahlinger, included in this work, should be seen as an extension of this development.

The different esthetic choices that were made when creating the performances that we will be looking at can be traced back – both from a conceptual aspect, as well as a more intricate and detailed perspective – to this period and development in art history. As such it can be seen as a reference of sorts, even if I don’t include specific artists and their practice – with the exception of Cage – into the reasoning. The critical treatment of Cage’s esthetics is mainly done through the work of Joan Retallack (1996), Richard Kostelanetz (1987), and Bernstein and Hatch (2001).

## The modality of the critique
It is characteristic of academic writing that it must continually confront the question of how to position itself. This is what most clearly differentiates its nature from an artistic practice, irrespective of its esthetic abode. The structural confinement of the norms of academic writing is also on a collision course with the inherent oppositional mode of an artistic undertaking, since a central value of art must be to oppose its means of production. The esoteric qualities, the unstableness of the exchange happening in the encounter between an artistic expression and its audience should therefore be calmly left alone. Though, the nature of artistic research – to which field this project belongs – sometimes represents an attempt to formulate and contribute to knowledge around this encounter, at the same time as it reveals its renunciation of that area of truth towards which language is directed. It seems like a contradiction, and so it is. What about this work? Does it belong to the category of contradictory critical undertakings? Yes, it does. However, this contradiction, which hopefully the above introduction has clarified, is not the dialectical field that represents the main area of investigation. Instead, it implies two sub-problems, from which all the other problems can be said to gain their momentum and, therefore, they need to be looked at and continually referred back to as a guiding matrix throughout.

The first of these problems is enveloped in the relation between the thinking and the doing, and the different kind of thinking going on, hence related to the question of positioning. Most of the thinking that took place when making the performances happened through doings. That means that the thinking, to a large extent, was of an internal, concealed kind which we have no insight into. But we do know that some of the thinking resulted in expressions; doings through space, in time. These expressions grew out of and were dependent on a large number of factors that all played their part in the collective creation. The different choices made in that endeavor were certainly based on a thorough esthetic reasoning but nevertheless intuitive in their nature. Hence, the important thing to consider is the relation between that kind of doing-thinking and the thinking that these reflections represent: thinking through problematized reflection. The latter then, does not refer to stable phenomena but to activities that are not only, to a significant extent, concealed but evolve in a relational mode, outside the confinement of the rendering and, which is the point I want to get to, ensued through a process geared towards composition. There is nothing in the following that resembles the energy of such a process, instead it is speculative and geared towards an open-endedness.<sup>20</sup><div class="footnote"><sup>20</sup> An interesting – and on some levels relevant – reasoning around the relation between the notion of critique and composition, can be found in Bruno Latour’s essay *An Attempt at a “Componist Manifesto”*, in which the notion of composition is extended, almost reinvented, and transferred into a political analysis. This text is brought up and briefly discussed in *Interview 19*. Latour initially asserts that “what performs a critique can not also compose”, which indicates the basis of his criticism that critique, in a modernist (and post-modern) sense, is so focused on progress through deconstruction and demarcation of forces, that the immanent movements, and constitution, of phenomena (in the world, in nature) are disregarded and not allowed to guide the formation – a composed – vision of a future world. (Latour 2010, 475)</div>

The second problem is related to the method of transferring and activating terms and concepts outside their original abode, outside the complexity they are most often dependent on. There is nothing unusual in such an attempt, but the problem becomes more accentuated when a process ontological discourse is utilized and the ambition is to analyze artistic creations framed in formats that cannot escape being seen as more or less fixed, with terms and concepts that *in themselves* should be fluid, continually questioned and re-worked. It generates a friction between the openness of the philosophical thinking and the fluid yet artifactual performativity of the performances. But the contradiction also occurs on the actual level of reasoning as it undeniably relies on a level of fixity, at the same time as it has to concur with the fact that the use and meaning of concepts in process philosophy are in flux, and every attempt to demarcate their movement and function is a distortion of sorts. A stern comment on the undesirable effect of this is given by Deleuze when he says that when  "difference is subordinated by the thinking subject to the identity of the concept (even where this identity is synthetic) difference in thought disappears" (Deleuze 1994, 266). This friction must be used as an impetus for suspicion: The idea of a convergence of all the infinite movements of life into a delimited performative event only holds up on a conceptual level, not on the level of experience.

Just as the positioning of the critique is a major concern in academic writing, so is the question of knowledge. Does the critical attempt contribute to existing knowledge, and if so, how? Can artistic research refute that question on the basis that the object of research and its inherent energy, truly and in so many ways, relies on personal, intuitive, thus ineffable, choices? The right to endorse an esoteric mode in academic criticism is reflected on by Georg Steiner in his foreword to Walter Benjamin’s treatise *The Origin of German Drama*, where he says that Benjamin propagated for “the rights of the esoteric” within a critical academic discourse. This esoteric level can be said to rely on the unuttered, and this reliance, in turn needs to be solid, hence similar to the prime energy in devotion. Steiner pulls this thought further into Benjamin’s critical undertaking as a whole, as well as down to a more personal (Benjamin) level when he says: "It is not only his material – the neglected plays and emblem-collections of German seventeenth century – that is esoteric; it is his critical task. How could it be otherwise? How could the empathic decipherment of many-layered texts in an idiom long-forgot, pretend a perfect clarity? In this context opaqueness and inwardness of semantic arrangement are a manifest of honesty” (Benjamin 1928, 22). The intellectual impetus of Walter Benjamin is untamable and driven by devotion, and this devotion, that runs throughout his work, is insistent and demanding in the sense that it is a writing in pursuit of a poetics that provokes and expands the forms and norms of academia. But Benjamin’s devotion is also demanding because it is driven by a desire for change. If anything can be clearly claimed, which is dubious, it might be that this desire is not primarily aimed at a materialistic change but at an expansive shift in position: A shift in the position of the critical gaze and an expansion of its receptiveness. This is why it is reasonable to let Benjamin and his spirit follow this work (even if his voice is quite sparsely present). But it is also reasonable because the field of artistic research has, since its inauguration, struggled with this question of the status of the ineffable and esoteric levels inherent in the spirit of art and its relation to the production of knowledge. From my perspective however, that struggle is not about refuting the idea of knowledge but about reconfiguring its appearance. It is about aligning it with process ontology and with the potential, in an experimental and speculative practice. Such an alignment means the rejection of a subject-object divide, and of the notion that knowledge is fact based. Following Brian Massumi, this means to disconnect the idea of knowledge from cognition and “its Cartesian stovepipe dream of foundational clearness and distinctness,” and instead place it in the “messy middling goings-on of pure experience in all its potential and complexity” (Massumi 2011, 11). To do so has far-reaching consequences because the cognitive subject-object dichotomy itself has far-reaching consequences, as it “extends itself into a division between ways of knowing, and from there into a hierarchy between modes of practice. This is especially evident in the division between disciplines of knowledge that are in a position to make a claim to ‘objectivity’ and those that are not. The traditional form this bifurcation of knowledge practices takes is the chasm between the ‘two cultures,’ scientific and humanistic. The same division recurs within the disciplines on each side of that massive divide, between empirical methods (in a decidedly nonradical sense) and speculative or theoretical approaches (dismissed by the other side as ‘merely’ subjective). This divide repeats as a distinction between modes of practices, even practices that do not define themselves primarily as knowledge practices, such as political practices. Here, the dichotomy recurs as an opposition between ‘fact-based’ or ‘commonsense’ approaches and ‘experimental,’ idealistic,’ or ‘utopian’ approaches, with a clear implication of the superiority of the former” (Massumi 2011, 11).

I think Massumi’s observation conjures up the question if this work needs to be put in relation to the specific academic field of artistic research? Is it necessary to relate to it at all? What would happen if that were not done? Would there be misunderstandings? Probably. My outline above, of the critical path(s) that I will follow, might be deceptive as it radiates a systematization of sorts, but it is speculative. Questions are asked and fields of tension located. A high level of clarity is not always apparent (and not always sought after), and no problems are solved. Suggestively, such a critical dynamic has to be met with an understanding that whatever could be of interest, whatever insights and contribution this work possibly makes, are to be found through an act of interpretation. So for that reason only, it is constructive to make clear that this work is practice based art research. It oscillates between a subjective stance – mainly constituted in the works of the art that it treats – and a critical attempt.

It is interesting to place the activities of the composer John Cage and his approach to his art practice in the light of artistic research. It seems that for him to do what he did, he had to nourish a reflective and critical side. It is therefore possible to play with the idea that he is not only the originator of the material that is set in motion – in the performances, as well as this critical work – but also a forerunner of artistic research.
