>The structure we should think about is that of each person in the audience. In other words, his consciousness is structuring the experience differently from anybody else’s in the audience. So the less we structure the theatrical occasion and the more it is like unstructured daily life, the greater will be the stimulus to the structuring faculty of each person in the audience. If we have done nothing, he will have everything to do.

>John Cage

## In the midst of it all

When you walk into the performance space, things are already going on. Dancers are moving and musicians are making music. Soft percussion sounds can be heard. There are no raised stands to sit on and no obvious stage. Instead, low dark-yellow benches are placed on the white floor about two, three meters away from the black walls, on three sides of the room. You take a seat, like everybody else in the audience, and from where you sit you can see not only the dancers moving, but also other members of the audience, across the room. You do not see the dancers who are moving behind you, but you hear them. The music is continuous but its intensity varies. Sometimes the trombone makes a strong long low sound, sometimes only the air blown through the instrument can be heard. The timbre of the percussion is wood and stone and the sparse metric pattern creates a sense of time being measured, low in dynamic, but steady. The four dancers are in their own very personal world of movements. There is no doubt that they are dancing but they all incorporate moments of stillness and, in certain sequences, they seek to establish relations between each other, either by moving close together or by mirroring one another. Nobody is talking, all you hear is the music and the brushing of feet against the floor.

Five high, box-like wooden shields, varying in width, lean against the walls, at different places in the room. One dancer with yellow socks moves into the center of the room, slowly, looks at his hands and lies down as if sleeping. Another dancer, the “blue-shirted-woman,” is sitting by the wall, close to one of the wooden shields and when the “yellow-socked-man” lies down, she slowly starts to dance and gravitates towards one corner where two other dancers, the “green-socked-man” and the “red-shirted-woman,” are developing movements close to the floor, disconnected from each other in tempo and articulation. For a moment these three dancers form a sort of group of rhythmically disparate movements. Suddenly the “blue-shirted-woman” pulls away and runs along the walls, behind the audience, all around the room but stops abruptly when she is back by the wooden shield where she sat a minute ago. Exactly when she stops, the dancer lying on the floor starts to move one of his yellow-socked feet. He starts building a new sequence of movements, it grows in intensity and the “blue-shirted-woman” standing by the wooden shield is pulled into the center of the room, closer to the “yellow-socked-man” and their movements become more and more related in type and tempo. As if drawn in by their intensity the “red-shirted-woman” joins in with movements in the same mode. The intensity and articulation of the movements among the three dancers increases, becomes like a rupture until it slows down and the three of them, still in the center of the room, drift apart and their movements head down closer to the floor. While all this is happening the “green-socked-man” stands behind the audience at the end of the room and makes very slight movements with his hands close to his head, near to a wooden shield. The three dancers in the center become two when the “red-shirted-woman” dances away behind the audience, and the two that are left, the “yellow-socked-man” and the “blue-shirted-woman,” develop what could be described as a duet with emotional, relational connotations. The “red-shirted-woman” walks to a wooden shield by the wall, moves it slightly, and when she does this the “green-socked-man,” at the other end of the room, grabs the wooden shield close to him and moves with it through the center of the room, and places it next to another wooden shield along the long wall. The duet is dissolved at the same moment as the “green-socked-man” walks through the center, and the “yellow-socked-man” and the “blue-shirted-woman” drift towards different walls, behind the audience.

After putting his wooden shield down, the “green-socked-man” bends his back so that both hands and feet touch the floor and he walks like that into the center of the room. He slowly bends his body upwards and starts developing a sequence that has the quality of testing the smallest muscles. The “red-shirted-woman” moves along the wall, approaches the center of the room, while walking with both hands and feet on the floor. She gets closer to the “green-socked-man.” They relate. The “blue-shirted-woman” sits down by a wooden shield, she moves her neck as if tired, then she looks up and her left arm follows, up, up. The “yellow-socked-man” moves one wooden shield a short distance, then he lies on the floor behind the audience, and starts to move like a worm, towards the center of the room. When getting closer to the couple in the center, who are now in a duet-like sequence, the “green-socked-man” walks away and leans on a wooden shield by the wall. At the same time the “blue-shirted-woman” becomes more energetic in her movements. She gets up, she moves around the room, along the walls and then she comes into the center. The “yellow-socked-man” lies down, looks at his hand. The movements of the “red-shirted-woman” become more inward, she dances out of the center. The “blue-shirted-woman” develops an intense dance close to the lying “yellow-socked-man.” All this time, the music is there, the wooden percussion and the sparse low sounds from the trombone.

The dancing continues, shifting in intensity, different configurations of groups form and dissolve until, after about an hour, the “blue-shirted-woman” places one of the wooden shields in the middle of the room. The “yellow-socked-man” crawls slowly into the center, he comes up close to the “blue-shirted-woman” who is sitting on the shield she just placed on the floor. The “green-socked-man” and the “red-shirted-woman” come into the center of the room each carrying a wooden shield, and place them standing up on their short ends, next to the one that the “blue-shirted-woman” just put down. The “yellow-socked-man” stands up and moves to a bench and sits down amongst the audience. The other three dancers, in the center of the room, pick up their wooden shields and carry them up-right while they slowly walk around with them, as shields. When the “yellow-socked-man” sees this he stands up and walks up to one of the wooden shields that is still is leaning against the wall. He picks it up, carries it up-right, like the others and walks into the center where the other three are slowly moving with their shields. The group re-arranges themselves, carrying the shields, trying different configurations. They move close, like a wooden cluster, they separate and one follows another, the two other follow after, they form a new group, they stand still, one of them starts moving again and the others follow, then it all dissolves when the “blue-shirted-woman” walks away carrying her shield and leans it against the wall, with the back side showing (opposite from before). The other three dancers do the same, one by one, slowly, until all five shields (one shield has not been moved at all throughout the performance) lean against the wall, side by side. The dancers move into the dark. The music continues for a while, then it stops. The lights slowly go down.

## Introduction

As an extension of the chapter *Who is the creator?* this text intends to investigate if the exchange between the expression of the performance and its audience can be thought of as an immanent process. A good way to start is to turn back to the introductory quote and ask what is the “everything,” that Cage indicates the individual in the audience has to do? What is the “structuring faculty” that needs to be engaged? It is possible to approach these questions asking instead: What is it that the performance *does not* do when it renounces the idea of one major focus, of one main narrative?

In the performances we are looking at, different expressive material is set in motion in a mode of superimposition and multiplicity. In such a structure, “the less,” that Cage refers to, equates with an abandonment – hierarchically/rhythmically/dynamically – of all predeterminations regarding the relations between the different expressive components. It means that the performance does not put forward a line of reasoning, it does not offer any causality or narrative to which the components can be placed/related, nor is there one specific order that the components within the assemblage must adhere to. This is the “everything” that the “structuring faculty” of the individual in the audience has to do: create his/her own inner idea of the order, put them on an inner map, acknowledge, decide, and assign weight and relationships to the different components. The structuring faculty is not, however, something that is turned on when one comes to the theater. It is a continuously present impulse to organize what is perceived, and it is dependent on a large number of factors ranging from preconceived notions about all the phenomena surrounding us (such as theater) to impulses contingent on a primal human need to handle and structure all incoming stimuli. The dramaturgy in the performances relies heavily on the potential of this structuring faculty.<sup>171</sup> They are made with the intention to engage it on a highly active level, beyond the idea of a need to navigate through life, and it is this active engagement that I talk about as co-composition, or co-creation. The question is if this perceptive process of co-composing can be seen as mirroring the dynamic of an immanent process of creation happening within the ensemble? Can the concept of an immanent creative process be transferred to a sequence of perception in the audience? How does the abstraction of the expression take on meaning as a creation made by each individual in the audience?  In other words, can meaning lie in the experience of co-composition? And if so, can the experience of co-composition be thought of as a process of becoming? And, which is most central, how can these questions be processed, investigated and transformed into directorial thinking and compositional choices? However, even if these questions constitute the investigative impetus of the following, they are rhetorical. They connote a search for a structural generality outside my own directorial thinking, outside the three performances that function as our reference, and even if that search for extensions is partly my explorative intent, it is crucial to keep in mind that the questions derive from their intentional counterpart: *they expose a hoped-for outcome*. Every measure taken, consciously or unconsciously, individually or collectively, during the process of directing, was aimed at, not only investigating the relevance of the above questions, but to set them in motion.

Embedded in the attempt to render the perceptive situation as an opening for co-composition and hence a possibility of becoming, lies an obvious risk of confusing assumptions with facts, and that needs to be observed in order to avoid undermining the refinement of the processes going on. When, for example, Marvin Carlson in his foreword to Erika Fisher Lichte’s book *The Transformative Power of Performance*, says that the shift from an object-oriented to an event-oriented esthetic carries the possibility to “have an experience which causes us to gain a new, refreshed comprehension of our own situation of being in the world,” it must be understood as an intention, as a theoretical extension of a critical reasoning, and not as an evident outcome (Fisher-Lichte 2008, 7). The most interesting reason for bringing this up is because it allows us to make the important observation that any kind of dramaturgical restructuring should, from the artist’s point of view, be seen as *rooted in esthetic preferences*. The introductory description above, from a part of one of the performances of *Ryoanji – A Meeting*, should be apprehended in light of this observation: It is an attempt to give an impression of the sequences of movements and sounds going on in the performance, an attempt to paint a picture of the complex perceptive situation, and as such intended only as an entry into thinking about the production of meaning in multilayered and non-narrative performative expressions and *not* a rendering of a directorial intent.<sup>172</sup> This is to say that the notion of perceptive complexity is not the primary incentive for creating the performance, in the first place. Instead, I would say that the creative seed for the performance comes from a desire to enable an encounter with a world less known. The different choices made in that endeavor are certainly based on a thorough esthetic reasoning but nevertheless intuitive in their nature. Assumptions of possible perceptive outcomes are part of those choices, but it would be a mistake, that could lead to an instrumentalist dynamic, to place the perceptive intent ahead of an artistic choice. Such a gaze is apparent in esthetic criticism, like performance and theater studies and, no doubt, inspiring to insert as critical momentum in the reasoning. But the challenge in the following text is to harbor both perspectives and to find a correlation between looking at the creative/esthetic intent from a directorial point of view, as well as at the perceptive possibilities. This leads us to the very important question: What kind of criticism is this reasoning trying to produce? Problematizing the concept of meaning by looking at how different formal structures can be valued regarding the possibility for the viewer/audience to be co-creative when experiencing the theater performance, is certainly not a new question among theater artists or in performance and theater studies. Rich explorations, offered for example in the book mentioned earlier by Erika Fisher-Lichte (2005, 2008), or in the work by art theorist Claire Bishop (2012), on central issues and concepts for contemporary performance art like; participation, co-creation, meaning, the performative event, and so on, can easily be found in contemporary performance studies literature. Since the connection between critical works of that kind and the undertaking being made here is clear, we need to define the difference.  In doing so, the critical gaze is placed in the midst of the creative process: my position as director, as instigator and constructor of the different concepts. To start from that pivotal position – which obviously is unavoidable – allows us to illuminate the interplay between esthetic choices and their intended effect, but it also allows for the possibility to follow the intricate entwinement between detailed compositional choices, their relation to a directorial thinking and to the question of an immanent process in the exchange happening between the expressive matter and the audience. An evaluation of, and theorizing around the esthetic choices made from such a position also makes it possible to pose the question: what do the specific choices that are made when creating the performances, exclude? By turning the question around, the concepts of *co-composition*, and *a process of becoming*, become central elements in the discussion on the perceptive dynamic, hence also descriptive of dramaturgical strategies.

When looking at such complicated processes, as the experiencing of theater performances through the lens of perception theory/psychology and philosophy, it is crucial to return to the actual experience, the actual space and energy in the performances. The level of abstraction, and assumption, is by necessity high and therefore important to treat with care. The theorizing of the immanent process within the creative collective that I tried to develop in *Who is the Creator?* was to a certain degree, stabilized by the dialogue and interviews with the actors and musicians. Now, when looking at what happens in the exchange between the performance and its audience in respect to an immanent process, the possibility to weigh my reflections and questions against other voices and experiences is not there in the same way.<sup>173</sup> The trajectory of the reasoning therefore takes on a slightly different character that moves circuitously between description – intention – assumption – reflection.

The different parameters of the performances, their quality and constitution, are intertwined and in continuous shifting relationships. In other words, each occurrence – and consequently the analysis of its status – is dependent on its immediate surrounding circumstance. Nevertheless, it is unavoidable that a reasoning around the production of meaning has to trace the different influential parameters – or it maybe makes more sense to think about them as formal aspects – more or less separately, in order to link them to a directorial thinking: *how these aspects are anticipated when creating the concepts and handled in the actual compositional and directorial practice*. The critical separation of the different parameters also enables us to trace how their interrelated concepts are molded to fit the dynamic of the reasoning. Central to the exploration so far, has been the concept of an immanent creative process as descriptive of the creative mode within the ensembles. It has been delineated by the notion that the different individual expressions are set in motion through the judgment of each performer, and that each expressional form emanates from a personal initiative/action/improvisation, that is in turn influenced by the stimuli that is perceived by each performer, resulting in an improvisational sequence within the group of performers. In the following, however, the concept of an immanent process is intended as descriptive of a mode of exchange between *everybody simultaneously present in space and time*, as participants in the theatrical event. Such an extension of the communicative interplay inevitably elicits other concepts and ways of looking at the performance situation, as it is then confronted with preconceptions of what theater “is,” what a theater space should look like, how a story should unfold; all of which the audience brings with them to their visit to the theater, and factors that have to be acknowledged, respected and met with specific directorial choices and compositional decisions.

The performances take place in specific spaces. They are specific not only because they have been chosen but also because they have been altered and designed specially for the performances. This is of importance in the reasoning around the question of meaning, and to look at the details in regards to the space, how it functions, what it generates and how its design correlates to the perceptive intent, hence to the production of meaning, is therefore significant. On that point, the concepts of *shared space* and *encounter* are inserted to problematize the notion of esthetics of production, and of the performance as a “piece of work”. The underlying directorial reasoning, functioning almost like a substrate throughout, is that the space itself is transformed from being a place for a presentation to a place for a coming together.

When reflecting on the production of meaning, it is almost impossible not to problematize the concept of *representation*: representation as a system where the codification of signs, symbols, semantic and semiotic language are established.  This is the system in which the performances that we are looking at operate. They are part of a world built on a representational coding. But as representation purports definitions as fixed, as operating with defined measures, and can thus be seen as exerting a transcendent force, it is essential for the immanent creative process, as well as for the overall esthetic intention, to not only problematize its workings in the moment of perception, but to look at how it can be counteracted and replaced with a notion of presence. The critique of representational esthetics moves like an eddy, round and round and round, and it produces overlapping reflections on the phenomena, its constitution, power, importance, unavoidability and crisis. To move into that apparatus, to incorporate the many strains of thought on this issue, is not what will be done here. Instead, I will look at representation as an obstacle, as an unavoidable precondition in the creative processes and in the compositional/dramaturgical thinking.

## No Borders (of Immanence)

The low but steady intensity of every day life passes for the most part unreflected upon, even unnoticed. Sounds come and go, and our bodies and minds constantly shift in and out of multiple situations, multiple relations. Perhaps it can be assumed that humans most often strive to experience the articulation of the perpetual shifts and changes that constitute life, as having an even, steady character. Irrespectively, the initiative to visit a theater performance can very likely be understood as a conscious move away from the intensity of the ordinary as it conveys the expectation that something different will be experienced. And, on our way into the theater we anticipate that there is a threshold to climb over, a step to take, into a particular space where something different will commence. But as immanence is everywhere and perpetual, one could say that no starting point exists, no event starts from zero. Therefore, the performance can be seen as a continuation, with no discrete perceptual borders. Can this also be described as life, and all its movements, being in a “constant middle”? In the mode of perpetual motion, and reflecting on the esthetics of Carmelo Bene, Gilles Deleuze says: “Of interest is the middle (*le milieu*), what is happening in the middle. It is not by chance that the greatest speed is in the middle. People often dream of starting or restarting from zero; and they also fear their arrival, their terminal point. They think in terms of future or past; but the past and even the future are *history*. What counts, on the other hand, is the becoming: becoming-revolutionary, and not the future or the past of the revolution.” (Murray 1997, 242). This reoccurring “dream of starting or restarting from zero” is closely related to the discussion around creating and being in “the whole,” an organizing instinct that a non-narrative and non-representative esthetic provokes and undermines.

To make the idea of being in a constant middle the starting point for reflections on a possible transformation of the performance – from a monadic entity into an open, fluctuating and dialogic event – entails a conceptualization of the relation between an all-encompassing and perpetual immanent movement *and* the form and matrix of the performance. Because, if the immanent condition of ongoing life is separated from the immanence/transcendence of the performance, the possibility of an immanent process happening within the performative event, is reduced. So the question arises: How do the specific temporal and spatial borders of the performance (as an unavoidable artifact) relate to an anti-hierarchical view on events and to immanence as perpetual and indefinite movement? The diverse circumstances of the performance are, in themselves, indicators of a value-claim, of sorts. A value that, in the pre-notion of what theater “is,” separates it from the ongoing life events. Cage talked about the performance of a piece of music as a possible “other world,” with specific qualities that could not be found outside its presentation, and that this notion could serve as a possibility. As my directorial intention is to acknowledge this possibility and to reassure its occurrence *at the same time* as looking for synchronization with the movements that surround the performance, the focus must be on analyzing how the imaginary borders can be respected as well as deconstructed and reconfigured.

The interest to approach this dynamic, to modulate and play with the boundaries between a performative quality based on specific performer skills, on thorough preparations and on precise expressive intention and a more bare, unshielded and daily form of performative communication, has for a long time been central to contemporary performance and theater art. In the context of how the individual performer works in the performances that we are focusing on, I find that the most relevant way of talking about these two, certainly fluctuating modes of acting, is as “self-articulated” versus “dialogically-articulated.”<sup>174</sup> However, dissolving the boundaries between the uniqueness of the performance and ongoing life has been the core around which dramaturgical investigations and performative experimentation of different kinds have evolved since the mid-1900s. The list of examples is long and cannot be rendered here, but generally speaking, it can be seen as an attempt to dissolve the binary relation between performance and spectator, between the object and the viewer. In keeping with Erika Fisher-Lichte, here lies an “aesthetic of the performative,” and it can be talked about as signifying a performative turn in which dichotomous pairs such as subject/object and signifier/signified lose their polarity and begin to oscillate (Fisher-Lichte 2008, 25). Historically, this turn, this aim to dissolve the boundaries, is not solely attached to the art of theater but has also emerged in fine art, music and literature, when the creative expression tends to be realized in and as performance. This can be seen as a shift towards processes and the “pivotal point of these processes is no longer the work of art, detached from and independent of its creator and recipient, which arises as an object from the activities of the creator-subject and is entrusted to the perception and interpretation of the recipient-subject. Instead, we are dealing with an event, set in motion and terminated by the actions of all the subjects involved – artists and spectators” (Fisher-Lichte 2008, 22-23). When considering the development of contemporary theater, and following the line of thinking offered by Kathryn Mederos Syssoyeva in her two volume exposé of collective creation in theater art,<sup>175</sup> it is clearly possible to attach the problematization of borders to the counter culture (esthetico-political) movement of the 1960s and 70s during which hierarchical structures within creative collaborations were deeply questioned, fusing a similar intense questioning of the dyad performance – spectator.<sup>176</sup> Embedded in that movement lay an intention to “think of collective creation as straddling the threshold between the performativity of social life and performance as such – positing that collective creation foregrounds the creative action of social and ethical structuring in a dynamic interplay with the creative action of performance making” (Syssoyeva, 2013b, 7). Continuing that line of thinking and putting it in a historical context, Syssoyeva makes the observation that when the theater lends itself to this kind of an encounter, it can be seen as an extension “of the dialectical play between drama’s traditional concern with the social and the intrinsically social nature of making and sharing drama” (Syssoyeva 2013b, 7). In such a light, and stemming from the political turbulence of the 60s, it is easy to see this development as an outcome of socio-ethical impulses, and that collective creation appears “less as a manifestation of any one ideological position than as a genre of performance making that positions itself at the intersection of social and aesthetic action” (Syssoyeva 2013b, 8). This can surely be seen as a redefinition of the relationship between actor and spectator, between performance and audience, since the theater was no longer aimed at being “conceived as a representation of a fictive world, which the audience, in turn, was expected to observe, interpret, and understand.” Instead, it was about an exchange “*between* the actors and the spectators and that constituted theatre. It was crucial that *something* happened between the participants and less important *what* exactly this was” (Fisher-Lichte 2008, 20-21).

In order to move into the specifics of the performances that I cite as references, the most clear and helpful divider to use, is to separate those experiments that seek to dissolve the borders by placing the performance outside the theater, on the street, or in public spaces of different kinds, from those that are placed within a space that, either permanently or temporarily, is given the status of “a theater”. It is in such spaces that the performances take place, in such situations that this reasoning around the work of the performer finds its validity, in relation to spaces of that type the problematization of the above described dynamic finds its relevance, and it is under such circumstances that my directorial intent is developed.  It is a space that does not pretend to be anything other than a theater, with all the presumptions and cultural heritage that comes attached to that notion. Maybe it is fair to say that, to a large extent, the most influential artistic experimentations regarding this issue happened outside the confinements of “the theater,” like in the development of performance art.<sup>177</sup> But it is obviously not fair to claim that contemporary theater artists, in general, are unaware of and uninterested in approaching and provoking/testing these expressive borders. Though, I suggest that the distinct circumstances and the dynamics of the performative expression that the theater is rooted in, historically and formally, holds the potential and capacity to fluently shift between different degrees of stylization. It is precisely this multifaceted capacity, contained in the sensitivity of the performer, where we can find the intricacy that allows us to explore how the border between what I earlier called the “self-articulated” and the “dialogically-articulated,” can be inserted into directorial and dramaturgical thinking.  

If my choice as director is to create a performance within the walls of a traditional theater, with actors, musicians and/or dancers, and at the same time work to reduce the height of the threshold that demarcates theater as such, and try to enable a synchronization with the movements of life that surround the performative event, I need to focus on the possibilities for the performer to shift his/her expressive quality (mode of contact, level of stylization). Concretely that means that I need to create the circumstances in which a truly flexible membrane for diverse types of contact can occur. The performers do not aim to expose anything private, there is no mode of an “ordinary” kind. The foundation of their performative expression is what they, with the help of different technical tools and with different words, create and describe as a character (a performative persona).<sup>178</sup> As director I encourage this approach/actor methodology, as I see it as the creative space in which the integrity of the performer can take shape, and this is applicable both to a situation where the performer is explicitly portraying a character (for example Merce in *John and the Mushrooms*), as well as when that is not the case (as for the dancers in *Ryoanji – A Meeting*). This way of looking at the work of the performer is not only in tune with the un-reflected expectation of what a performer “does,” but it also encapsulates and exposes the technical expertise that the performer holds. It is a capacity that enables the performer to shape and pull the expression to different levels of refinement and stylization. Just to clarify; the presence of this performative approach solidifies the borders between the performer and the spectator, but it *also* is a necessary condition for the expression to reach the expressive refinement that the particular material demands, and as such it is the precondition to generate a possible “other world,” with specific qualities that could not be found outside its presentation. Consequently the directorial challenge is to find ways to, momentarily, change (deconstruct, dissolve) this approach in order to enable an experience of the border reduced, gone if possible, so that a membrane of contact with the rhythm of life as it moves outside the performative event, is established. Inducing shifts of that kind in the performer approach/contact is something that contemporary theater often plays with, and can be thought of as perceptive multi-stability, destabilizing the perception of the actor body by switching between their bodily-being-in-the-world (the phenomenal body) and their representation of a dramatic character. Referring to her own thorough exploration of the development of theater history, contemporary theater and performance art, Erika Fischer-Lichte deepens the understanding of this dyad by saying that, at “this point, we are able to radically redefine the term embodiment. By emphasizing the bodily being-in-the-world of humans, embodiment creates the possibility for the body to function as the object, subject, material, and source of symbolic construction, as well as the product of cultural inscriptions” (Fischer-Lichte 2008, 89). Such a formulation recognizes a wavering quality between stylization and reality, but it can also be understood as extending the dyad of the phenomenal and the fictionalized body into a de-individualized body (material, source of symbolic construction), and this concurs with my aspiration to create a collective expression where the singular subject is subsumed by the collective, though *not* to the point that the notion of the singular is lost. However, this, which we will come back to later, is an outcome of structural specifics, and emerges as a result of compositional strategies.

In compositional structures where the actor's activity is based on chance and improvisation, the triggering of shifts in performer approach cannot be transferred through detailed directorial instructions but need to be worked with on a conceptual and methodological level. As a director, I tried to accomplish this, in all three of the performances, by inserting components – “things” – that moved the performer rather than that the performer determined the moves, with the intention that this would produce a specific expressive quality. One could say that the thing exerts a governing force, and that the performer is forced to relate to the radical exteriority of it. However,it is important to note that the expressive outcome of such an encounter is totally dependent on whether the performer attitude, when encountering this thing, is geared towards incorporating it into a stylized movement, i.e. if it is incorporated in a stylistically coherent way or towards acknowledging it as a difference, pulling the performer away from one type of expression into another. This is of course also dependent on the nature of the thing. Let’s try to make this more concrete by first looking at a couple of examples in contemporary theater where the nature of this “thing” exposes the wide range of phenomena/circumstances it can refer to.

In 2006, the Swedish director Suzanne Osten created the performance of *Baby Drama*, a theater piece that is known as the first-ever made for preverbal children, created for an audience aged 4-12 months old.  Very early on in the process, the director and the ensemble realized the significance of examining the quality of the *very first meeting* with the audience, and how important it was that the audience – caretakers and children - felt secure and comfortable to open up responsively. To create a calmness, and proactively meet assumed concerns about what to do if the child was uncomfortable, had a tantrum or needed a diaper changed, totally shaped the prologue of the performance, which was a discrete part of the performative event. The “thing” in this instance was not the child, or the caretaker, but the combination of intention and understanding: We wanted to make a performance for really young human beings, and in order to succeed we needed to meet the needs of the spectators. The governing force that moved the performance/performer in an unavoidable direction was, in this case, the specific needs of the audience that had to be met in order for them to be able to participate in the event.

The director Kia Berglund created together with her ensemble Teater Giljotin, in Stockholm, Sweden, in the spring of 2011, the performance of *Become an Idiot* (*Bli en dåre*) where the audience was invited to partake in a 48 hour long performance that took place in a mental institution, as a fictional place.<sup>180</sup> The performance included a wide variety of performative modes, ranging from discretely delineated performances of songs, to dialogic moments, interviews/discussions between one individual from the audience and an actor. The complexity of the interaction – the exchange between the performers/performance and the audience – clearly steered the quality and intensity of the performer activity, i.e. the performance. The “thing” that the construct of the performance concept inserted as a governing force, exerting extensive influence on the expressive outcome, was the individual audience member.

These two examples are related as they both acknowledge and allow the subject towards whom the performance aims to communicate to be the “thing” that moves the performer/ performance outside a predetermined and self-articulated form. And, they are also clear examples of how the borders, surrounding the event as a preconceived artifact, can be reduced and reconfigured through the insertion of an outside component. However, when moving into looking at how “things” were inserted into those performances that serve as our reference, we will see that the nature of their constitution can and must vary. All the same, the purpose of the directorial choice to make such insertions is to shift the energy of the performer away from his/her realm of expertise towards a less heightened expression, of a more “real” kind.

Now, looking at the things in the performances of our focus, we can begin with *John and the Mushrooms* and the specific moment when chance, for the first time, was let in to steer the performance. This was a sequence that both, in a tactile way but also in its unpredictability, confronted the performers with stimuli that exerted a governing force. The throwing of the dices, the choosing of the cards, and the reading of the instructions, were all moments that to different degrees required the performer to activate a kind of judgment and sensitivity that lay outside the characteristics of their character.<sup>181</sup> In that particular sequence, the moment that most radically demanded the performer to alter his/her rhythm and focus was when he/she asked a person in the audience to hold the deck from which he/she was to pull out the number of cards that the dice had shown. For this to work, the performer needed to slow down and establish contact and trust in the audience members in front of them, wait for a response (Who, of the audience members seated here, is going to stretch out his/her hand and grab the deck of cards?), maybe give them a small instruction on how to hold the cards, pull the cards out and with a nod, a word or a blink of the eye, say thanks.

In the performance of *Ryoanji – A Meeting*, the “thing” that forced the performers to shift their energy away from a fluent and unique personal dance expression, was actually just a thing, an object with rather cumbersome dimensions: five tall, but light in weight, box-like shields made of wood. At the beginning of the performance they were placed around the performance space, standing/leaning against the walls. The instructions to the performers was to, at randomly chosen moments, lift one box, carry it away and place it somewhere else in the room, leaning it against the wall. This could become a long walk from one end to the other, or shorter, it could happen as a singular movement or simultaneously by two or more dancers. In any case; the simplicity of the instruction combined with the cumbersome dimensions of the shield shifted the dynamics of the moving bodies away from their virtuosity into a quite plain, almost work-like expression. The position of the hands holding and arms lifting the shield, was, for purely practical reasons, done more or less in the same way by all the dancers. In comparison with the one instance in the performance of *John and the Mushrooms*, described above, the carrying of the shields was something that happened many times, all throughout the performance.  

The “thing” inserted as a governing force in the performance of *vorschläge* was again of a totally different nature. It was a combination of a piece of material – a text – and an instruction: read this text together, and then discuss how you understand it and what you get out of it. This thing – the text/instruction – meant that they were presented with a musical source that they were not used to, something outside their specific expertise as musicians. Reading and analyzing texts in a collaborative mode, participating in discussions around the meaning of written language, is not something that musicians engage in as part of their “every day” work. The task caused something to happen in the ensemble. It exposed a kind of stumbling, a wavering, an uncertainty that in its mode of consideration and listening clearly resembled the sensitivity that the musicians expose when making music. But, in its indecisiveness it showed a rather sharp contrast to the expressional strength that each individual exposed in the playing of music.

In order to refrain from saying anything about the ineffable experience within each individual performer when encountering the different “things,” for example making assumptions as to what degree they experienced the things as useful or useless constraints, we need to stay with the reflections around the directorial intention behind incorporating them. The most rudimental explanation is that they are inserted to create a difference, a difference in performer energy. Further, lies the idea that the experience of this difference is an opening up for increased contact between the performed and the perceiver. As such, and from a directorial/dramaturgical perspective, the “things” constitute constraints with an enabling effect: to different degrees, they enable a de-hierarchization of the relations within the performative event.

In all three of the performances there are major expressive components that demand – and radiate – performer virtuosity, expressions impossible to reach without a high level of technical skills. This is assumedly sensed by the audience, and constitutes the main condition for experiencing “the other world.” But the radical exteriority of the inserted “things” forces a shift precisely away from this. In *John and the Mushrooms*, a performance that to a greater degree than the other two is built on materials that demand a high level of expertise when performing, the specific moment in the performance described above might be seen as a detail, passing by in a flash, but in an overall dramaturgical sense it has a tremendous impact in this respect.<sup>182</sup> Through this “low” moment of contact, the high level of stylization (and performer virtuosity), was given a body and a reason to ensue, as well as it carried the implicit message that: I cannot do this without your help; you (all) contribute to making the performance happen the way it happens. The carrying of the wooden shields in *Ryoanji - A Meeting* was a movement that did not pass in a flash, instead came in as longer or shorter repeated disruptions. In its unavoidable practicality, it shifted the expression from a certain level of stylization – dance – to a level of bareness (bare activity), and as such it embodied a movement that we, the audience, can also (imagine/manage to) do. Related to that dynamic – I can also do what is being done (in the performance) – is the tentative discussion among the musicians around the meaning of the textual instructions in the performance of *vorschläge*. Though, that relatedness is not limited to the question of capability – discussing, talking, sharing – but harbors an additional layer of an existential nature as this attempt to understand (to carry) relates to the perpetual processes going on in every life, at every moment.

The directorial choice to insert “things” in a conceptual/compositional setup, is not unique in anyway, but their effect – and consequently their relevance in this specific reasoning – can be found in how they are thought of as influencing the perceptive possibilities inherent in the expressive material. In the complexity generated by the multi-layered superimpositions, the non-narrative structures, and in the non-idiomatic musical mode, the insertion of the “things” offers the audience a surface for contact of a more austere, less multifaceted nature. However, the insertion of “things” is just one of the measures taken to increase the possibility of shifting the performative event from a presentation of sorts to a meeting, and quite a few other aspects and perceptive sequences need to be looked at in order to understand how the directorial intention to dissolve the borders, was worked with.  

## Shared Space

The collective being in the theatrical space conjures up a sense of community. Though, regardless of whatever the theatre-makers might think or whatever they set forth to do, human beings are already “tied together by a certain sensory fabric, a certain distribution of the sensible, which defines their way of being together” (Rancière 2011, 56), outside the time and space of the performance. This is an inescapable fact, that makes loneliness and separateness a part of that; a togetherness. If different kinds social configurations are constitutive of life in general, then we need to ask how these take shape – and how do I as a director want them to take shape – in the theatrical situation? In the book by Erika Fisher-Lichte mentioned earlier, *The Transformative Power of Performance* (2008), the writer enters into an analysis of the performative turn in the 1960s through the German theater theoretician Max Herrmann, who was active in the early twentieth century and who’s work lay the foundation for the academic field of theater studies. He urgently argued that theater is performance and not literature, a social event and not an experience of a text: “The original meaning of theatre refers to its conception as social play – played for all. A game in which everyone is a player – actors and spectators alike … The spectators are involved as co-players. In this sense the audience is the creator of the theatre. So many different participants constitute the theater that its social nature cannot be lost. Theatre always produces a social community” (Fisher-Lichte 2008, 32). This notion of the unavoidable forming of a social community that happens at the theater is clearly a prerequisite for the critical treatment that Jacques Rancière develops in his essay *The Emanicipated Spectator*. He starts out with confirming, and extending, the observation by Hermann, by saying: “Since German Romanticism, thinking about theater has been associated with this idea of the living community. Theatre emerged as a form of aesthetic constitution – sensible constitution – of the community. By that I mean the community as a way of occupying a place and time, as the body in action as opposed to a mere apparatus of laws; a set of perceptions, gestures and attitudes that precede and pre-form laws and political institutions. More than any other art, theatre has been associated with the Romantic idea of an aesthetic revolution, changing not the mechanics of the state of laws, but the sensible forms of human experience. Hence reform of theatre meant the restoration of its character as assembly or ceremony of the community” (Rancière 2011, 6). The implications of this have, according to Rancière, resulted in a view that theater signifies “an exemplary community form.” and “an idea of community as self-presence, in contrast to the distance of representation” (Rancière 2011, 5). In other words, this sense of community can only be critically extrapolated if placed in a dialectical relation both to the specifics of the “togetherness” that constitute the event, as well as to the individual experience of being in it. What does that mean? Well, the dramaturgy and the formal structures of the performances that we are looking at, see apartness as an impossibility. This view is a prerequisite for the dramaturgical thinking, and what it relies on when claiming that multiple focuses and a polyphonic structure can be an opening for each individual experience to move along its own trajectory and take on its own quality.<sup>183</sup> However, if that can be said to indicate that the experience is of a solitary nature – as the likelihood that “my” experience is mirrored, hence confirmed, by somebody else in the room, is very little – the directorial intention is *certainly not* to create a feeling of apartness, or loneliness.  Rather the opposite, it is based on the idea that the situation should present alternative ways of thinking around the concept of a collective body, and that the uniquely personal experience is not one of isolation but of multiplicity. If the word “place” is exchanged with “experience” we can find the thought behind this idea sharply formulated by Jacques Rancière when he says that the construction “of the solitary place aims at creating new forms of socialization and a new awareness of the capacity of anyone and everyone” (Rancière 2011, 59).<sup>184</sup> It is not a stretch to connect this view with the esthetics and social consciousness of Cage and his use of the concept anarchic harmony, as it mirrors Rancière’s term “dissensual community,” which he refers to as an esthetic community “structured by disconnection” (Rancière, 2009, 59).<sup>185</sup>  Having said that, the dramaturgical idea to set in motion a multiplicity of expressive compounds from which each individual is encouraged to create their own experiential trajectory, has to acknowledge that it is a way of thinking that might meet a certain resistance inherent in the preconceptions of what the relationship between a theater performance and its audience is about, and my intention as director is to find ways to meet this resistance in a way that both enhances the sense of being together as well as encourages the view that this experience is of an individual nature. In this challenge, the specific spatial qualities of the shared space – what it allows, what it enhances, what relationships it generates – is of great importance.

If we look at the space where *John and the Mushrooms* was performed, it was designed as an open space, like a studio with cushions and low stools placed around the four walls, which could be moved and rearranged. There were working tables and musical instruments placed all around the room, facing in different directions. [LINK: photo of the theater space in which John and the Mushroom where performed] Kom ihåg! It was a space built to radiate both a tactile reality and an imaginative world, and this in-between, or dual quality was thought of as mirroring the concrete experimentations that the performers were engaged in, as well as its unpredictable, expressive outcome. It was not a fictive place; its time and materiality was in total sync with the occurrences outside its spatial confinement, but the specifics of the space made it possible for things to happen in a way like nowhere else.<sup>186</sup>  When the audience enters the performance space there are things going on. One actor is moving in the center of the room, doing things, preparing, and the four other performers are sitting around the four walls, alternately looking at him and at the approaching audience. They are sitting where the audience is going to sit so soon they will be right next to each other. Initially the audience radiates a sense of confusion and dislocation. The combination of looking at the ongoing action, and at the same time wondering where to sit (there are no seat numbers) seems to evoke some insecurity. Contact, communication and negotiations between the individuals in the audience – and with the performers already sitting down – are unavoidable outcomes of this situation. The space is fairly brightly lit, everything is visible, as people look at each other, bump into each other, take into consideration their various choices (Can I move this cushion here? Can you move over a bit?). The dynamic of this whole exchange is largely generated by the design of the space and by the aim to reduce the sense of difference between the well-prepared performer and the cautious anticipation of the audience member, hence an attempt to de-hierarchize the situation. It is a moment of increased awareness of shared space, and a sequence – due to the positioning of the performers among the audience – set up to instill the message that the audience will not be confronted as objects, with non-negotiable terms. Instead “their bodily co-presence creates a relationship between co-subjects” (Fisher-Lichte 2008, 32). All this could be said to happen *before* what the audience experience as the start of the performance, but from a directorial/dramaturgical point of view it has started. The sequence precedes the esthetic experience but is directed in a way that corresponds to the general idea that the space should open up “possibilities without defining how they will ultimately be used and realized” (Fischer-Lichte 2008, 108), and therefore a sequence meant to influence the temperature and quality of the performance *and* indicative of its immanent possibilities.

Both in the performances of *John and the Mushrooms* and *Ryoanji – A Meeting* the audience is placed in such a way that they more or less face each other. If the other measures that are taken to reduce the borders between the performance and the audience, are done to destabilize the binary relation between the object and the viewer, this choice of seating arrangement is partly made to diffuse the binary opposition of public and private: For the audience member on the other side of the room, “I” become part of the performance, “my” movements and reactions can, if I choose to see it that way, become part of the performative expression.<sup>187</sup> But the seating arrangement also has the potential to increase the sense of the individual in the collective body: “I” can see that the rest of the audience is made up of specific individuals, not “just” a number of other people, which makes “me” see my own position as unique.

As well as this social aspect of the seating arrangement, there is an esthetic aspect to the non-proscenium design: This relates to the multiplicity of expressions and the perceptive intent, which suggests that all the different places create their own unique view. Not just so that, what is seen is seen from a slightly different angle (like from the balcony or from down in the stalls), but more radically: Some see certain things going on, others see different things.<sup>188</sup> In other words, the performances were not just different from one day to the next, but also different dependent on where the individual audience member sat.<sup>189</sup> Hence, the experience of the performance evades the possibility of one single relevant description. The theater is then a place for an individual experience (in solitude) happening in a setting of togetherness. It can, and certainly should be argued that every (esthetic) experience is unique and individual, regardless of the specific circumstances it is made in. That is why the notion that the participants in the event build a community of a social nature that “cannot be lost” has to be problematized as it implies homogeneity, and exudes a repressive generality of sorts, hence goes against the esthetic/perceptive intent of the performances that we are talking about.

The decisions around how to design the space – just like the direction in general – is invoked by the idea that every social encounter between humans, as small and insignificant as it might seem, involves the act of interpreting signs and energies beside the spoken language. The quality of the encounter that happens in the theater space can thus be reflected on in relation to what it does, what type of relations, reactions and expectations it sets off in those people involved in the exchange. This might be seen as an indication of wanting to replace a sensual experience with a social one, thus putting it in alliance with the previously quoted comment by Fisher-Lichte (regarding the desired outcome of the Peter Handke play *Offending the Audience*), that the meaning of the theatrical performance lies in the fact that *something* happens between the participants of the event and less importantly *what* exactly this is (Fisher-Lichte, 2008). This is not an observation applicable to the performances that we are talking about. Instead, the directorial thinking and the esthetic ambition are deeply rooted in and dependent on the specific esthetic qualities of the material that is being performed and with an idea of their potential. Not just any material could have been placed within the dramaturgical concept of *John and the Mushrooms* or *Ryoanji – A Meeting*. The potential meaning of the meeting is embedded in *a combination of the sensual and the social experience*. Though, the way the performances are constructed, with an emphasis on the concreteness of the present moment and on the shared space-time experience and its social possibilities, directly mirrors life as it moves outside the theater. This is to say that my directorial intention is not to seduce, or to pull the audience into a world that represents something missing, but on the contrary *to emphasize that what is, what is there right in front of them, is what there is*. In order to address the perceptive repercussions of this thought inevitably entails confronting the complex question of representational esthetics.

## Breaking through the Representational

I would like to start talking about the relationship between an immanent creative process, the production of meaning and the hegemony of representational esthetics by telling about one specific instance in the performance of *John and the Mushrooms*. The first of the three chance operated processes to decide what the performers were going to play, sing, say or do, was a concretely performed sequence and a discrete performative event within the performance. It happened quite early and in close contact with the audience. After talking with audience members, of all different ages, who had seen the performance, we learned that many of them did not understand that the process of choosing what material to perform actually happened right there and then, before their eyes. They saw it, it was explained to them, they even helped to hold the cards with the instructions, but the willingness to comprehend that what they were seeing was generated by chance was just not there.<sup>190</sup> One could say that the event that was ahead of them was locked inside their expectation to experience something that had its meaning in its relation to something existing outside the present moment. In a reversed sense, this dynamic is tied to the question of an immanent process happening in the perceptive moment since it indicates the presence of a transcendent force, a grip, in which the perception is being captured. This transcendent force is the notion of representation: the expression is mediating something else, it is there to replace something missing. Following Deleuze, Claire Colebrook makes the important, and unavoidable, observation that such a binary division is disconfirmatory to the notion of an immanent process, when saying that this “dogma of representation is tied to transcendence: one point can act as a foundation or beginning for some other point. There is a world and then its representation. Representation is also a commitment to equivocity (two types of being, the real and its representation). And it is a refusal of immanence, for if we accept the thesis of immanence, that there is only one univocal plane of being, then how can we differentiate some already present world from its secondary and subordinate representation?” (Colebrook 2002, 162). It might be necessary to acknowledge, as a prelude to the following reasoning, that there lies the probability of detecting a tension between the notion that the immanent movement of the performance is a continuation of the perpetual movement of the world outside the performance, while at the same time maintaining the idea that the performance is a world in itself. Though, it is exactly at this point of tension where criticism of a representational esthetic has to be inserted. It sheds light on the notion that whatever world we are in – the world of the theater or outside – a representational coding refrains us from seeing and understanding change and difference, from experiencing a continuous becoming, as it operates on a level of mediation. This view permeates the esthetics of the performances we are looking at: They are not in connection with the world outside because they offer a representation of phenomena existing in what we call reality, but because they place a multilayered, fluctuating and perpetually changing concreteness within a spatially limited field. In other words, representation cannot be wiped away. It is a precondition not only for problematizing such central phenomena as communication, language and social interaction, but for building – and understanding the workings of – the dramaturgy of expressive structures.<sup>191</sup>

The history of philosophy and esthetic theory have produced an abundance of criticism, thoughts and reflections around the relationship between art and the phenomena of a representational esthetics, and certainly many of those strains are related to theater as the concept of mimesis lies at its core. Equally so, throughout the philosophy of Deleuze, the critique of representation – and of a thinking that avoids to contest its solidity – is, to say the least, strongly present, and at points in rather close contact to the performative aspect of theater. It is not really desirable to create a hierarchy between the different concepts that constitute the core gamut of terms in Deleuzian thinking, but as the phenomena of representation can be understood as standing in the way, being the most stubborn obstacle, in his theories on how life and thinking move through time, it is reasonable to regard it as the substrate, as the main referential opponent, in his philosophical explorations. It can also be argued that such a positioning of representation, as a determining concept, comes from its inherent relation to mediation, hence crucial to problematizing theater as an expressive form. With that said, it is important to point out that Deleuze’s critique of representation is deeply intertwined with his extensive thinking around the notion of difference.<sup>192</sup> Although that thinking cannot be rendered here (as repeatedly pointed out, we are engaging in a reductive reading), but a pragmatic understanding of the dynamics of difference, in the Deleuzian discourse, is that it constitutes the essential impetus for the infinite possibilities inherent in the infinite multiplicities of being and perceiving.<sup>193</sup>  All of which, as we shall see, are repressed by the generalizations that a representational coding imposes. Difference, when seen in such a light, and when placed in the framework of the performances, corresponds to the esthetic intent to allow for divergent, and contradictory, experiences. This is, however, neither an attempt to navigate through the impervious complex of how the notion of representation has developed throughout (art) history, or an overview of the many facetted treatments it is given by Deleuze, but an endeavor to problematize the workings of representation in relation to the performances and to the production of meaning. The take on Deleuze’s critique of representation is, in other words, an emphasis on those aspects that resonate with the conditions of the performances, as well as it – which is much due to the nature of the material that is performed – asserts the notion of representation as an obstacle. Such a take generates two questions: What did the performances want to accomplish in regards to the aspect of representation? And secondly, what dramaturgical and directorial/compositional measures were taken to enhance the possibility for the performances to escape the burden of representation?

The very first aim, when creating the performances, was to expose the esthetic and perceptive possibilities as untamed; to make the performances into openings (for unpredictable movements). Laura Cull places this aim in relation to the thinking of Deleuze when she says: “The program: to construct a theatre that escapes representation and creates the conditions for presence as the encounter with what Deleuze calls ‘continuous variation’. But how can theatre ‘break free of this situation of conflictual, official, and institutionalized representation?’ Deleuze asks. ‘How do we account for the underground workings of a free and present variation that slips through the nets of slavery and eludes the entire situation?’ ” (Cull, L 2009, 5). To set in motion such an “underground workings of a free and present variation” certainly depends on the particular nature and the specific moment of the exchange between the performed and the audience, thus dependent on how the concept of the performance is constructed, but it needs to start on the level of the individual performer expression. Is that really a fact? Does one not have a choice, in thinking this way? Yes, it is a directorial choice, and to not make that call would be to think that the expressive material is set in motion by a “non-subject.” It would be to regard, to treat and approach the individual performer as an executioner of an unchangeable instruction, and in an immanent collective creative process of the kind we are talking about here, that is not possible.<sup>194</sup> This is because it is a situation where individual creative decisions continuously have to be made, where improvisation is a major part, where the expressive outcome is dependent on the individual performer finding his/her specific strength *and* where dialogue and collective responsibility is a major concern, and therefore it is necessary to acknowledge the individual subject as the source of the expression. As an outcome of such an approach – which must be understood as grounded in a directorial methodology rather than a philosophical, ontological outlook – questions that are related to the domain of representation occur: What is the relationship between the expression that I create and my private self? What is the meaning of this text? Who is expressing it? What is my expression suppose to signify? What is the meaning of the performance? What is my relationship to the other characters, to the other performers? and many more. Questions of this type, when raised by the performers during the rehearsal process, must be met. Not because a representational esthetic is desirable, but because they are tied to the performers' more or less present need to define a source, a meaning and direction for their expressive activity.<sup>195</sup> My directorial stance/opinion is that these questions have to be processed in order to reach a point where they can be left behind and brought into a conceptual consciousness. Or, as formulated by Simon O’Sullivan: “Representation is the condition of our subjectivity and as such has to be ‘gone through’ as it were. It is here that thought and the possibilities of thought are crucial. We can *think* the world and ourselves differently” (O’Sullivan 2006, 16). But to use these questions around representation, posed by the performers, as a starting point – both for the creative processes as well as in this problematization – should also be understood as indicative of an important investigative undertaking, which is about wanting to look at the relation between truly subjective creative choices/decisions *and* concepts like immanence, anarchic harmony, superimpositions, collective creation, collective being. This investigative stance is, I confess, rhetorical as it ensues from the assumption that the crisis of representation is also a crisis in typical subjectivity, and therefore it is an active attempt to think our own subjectivity differently.

In contrast to encouraging questions around representation in the working processes, my directorial intention – manifested in the construct of the concepts – was to move beyond a representational dynamic; to blur the boundaries of as many definitions as possible, to trespass any interpretation, to create an expression that signified possibilities rather than solutions, to affirm the unknown and to ensure the unpredictable. In that aim representation can only be viewed as an obstacle. It stymies and fixes. It functions as an ordering faculty, it counteracts difference and multiplicity, and claims the position of being the ground on which all judgments should be made. To put it that reductively is of course contradictory to its undoubtedly multifaceted and complex workings, but to radicalize it in such a way is relevant to the esthetic intention and it is a stance that, through the impact of the many different concrete circumstances – the nature of the material, the subjectivity of the individual collaborators, the ins and outs of the production situation, and the influence of all the different relations – is grinded down and somewhat deflated, and therefore a formulation that finds its justification in what it provokes. However, it is useful to look at how to understand the stymieing as a phenomenon separate from fixity. When something is stymied, movement stops, it stands still, holds a position already taken, movement can happen but does not happen. Following Deleuze and placing it in relation to the activity of thinking, one can imagine it as an illusion of movement, in other words encapsulating its opposite i.e. unbound reflection. Taking this effect as a starting point for how the dynamics of representation have steered the development of philosophy, Deleuze enters into the activity of thinking in which the hegemony of representation and the discourse of the representative have deprived it of its possibility to move by constitutively purporting the notion that: “Everybody knows, no one can deny” (Deleuze, 1994, 130). It is worth quoting Deleuze further, as it is particularly appropriate to inform, even when taken out of its philosophical context, what kind of thinking that lay behind the esthetic choices that were made. He says:
>“Many people have an interest in saying that everybody knows ‘this’, that everybody recognizes this, or that nobody can deny it. (They triumph easily so long as no surly interlocutor appears to reply that he does not wish to be so represented, and that he denies or does not recognize those who speak in his name.) The philosopher, it is true, proceeds with greater disinterest: all that he proposes as universally recognized is what is meant by thinking, being and self – in other words, not a particular this or that but the form of representation or recognition in general. This form, nevertheless, has a matter, but a pure matter or element. This element consists only of the supposition that thought is the natural exercise of a faculty, of the presupposition that there is a natural capacity for thought endowed with a talent for truth or an affinity with the true, under the double aspect of a *good will on the part of the thinker and an upright nature on the part of thought*. It is because everybody naturally thinks that everybody is supposed to know implicitly what it means to think. The most general form of representation is thus found in the element of common sense as an upright nature and a good will” (Deleuze, 1994, 131).

This is an argument that grows out of an expansive critique of philosophy and philosophical practices and it is not so obvious how it – the movement of thinking – connects to the multisensory experience of being at the theater, but there are three distinct aspects that are linked both to an immanent creative process, and to the production of meaning, as well as to theater as such.  The first, which is the most obvious, is that when representation governs, the concept of recognition (“universally recognized”) pulls everything that is perceived into a system of established signifiers and away from the actuality of the present (the “particular this or that”) thus denying the immanent movement (of the performance). The second aspect concerns how the faculty of thinking is bound up with the notion of “a pure matter or element,” and how this notion ties the experience (of the matter/element) to what already is known (by thought), as the truth (about the matter/element). The performances elaborates with the idea that the “natural exercise” of thinking can be encouraged to move away from one truth to another, by experiencing a discrepancy between what is already thought (known) and what is directly experienced in the event. This is to assign a value *not* to thinking as such (as it is already supposed to be “the natural exercise of a faculty”) but to thinking the unthought within the perceptive moment, *and* to regard thinking not as an obstacle for a direct (intuitive, emotional) experience but as a coherent part of the complex process of perceiving. The third aspect is tied to the notion of a *“good will on the part of the thinker and an upright nature on the part of thought”* and its relation to theater as institution, to its historical (self assigned?) position within western intellectual culture, and its relation to politics and political issues. It is a history that puts conflicts at the center: conflicts of thoughts as well as conflicts between political systems. The overarching intent of such theater is to incite, to participate in and contribute to the public dialogue around political/social conflicts by staging and “telling stories” that criticize the prevailing power and the repression that it stands for. That intent is governed by a thinking characterized by a “good will” and “an upright nature” (Which is why western theater often regards itself as part of the backbone of democracy.) Such an adaptation of a representational thinking (into the making of theater) creates formal structures of a type that are criticized by Deleuze as being stuck in an esthetics of representation that actually reproduces, consolidates – and commodifies – conflicts rather than dissolving them, or maybe one should say, rather than offering alternative ways of approaching them.<sup>196</sup>  Though, such alternative approaches cannot, as we shall see, be based on the idea of making representation infinite (an excessive, overflowing chain of re-shaping), as it *“nevertheless does not acquire the power to affirm either divergence or decentering*. It requires a convergent and monocentric world.” (Deleuze 1994, 263).

To start looking at the workings of representation by examining its influence on the activity of thinking is to grab it by its root.<sup>197</sup> It is in what we conceive as thinking, that the division between the perceiver and what is perceived is fixed, where the division between the actual and the virtual is drawn up – by representation, thus installing a referent of a transcendental nature. In following Deleuze, Clair Colebrook clarifies the connections between the activity of thinking, the notion of common sense and representation by saying: “From the viewpoint of representation and common sense, the actual world provides a foundation or external model (transcendence), and thought ought to be a faithful copy or replication of the actual. If we were to accept this, then thought would be judged according to its accuracy or correctness or the degree to which it recognizes some outside or external reality (transcendence)” (Colebrook 2002, 2).<sup>198</sup> An attempt to enter into the intricate interlacing of perception and thinking cannot be done here, but to locate the binary dynamic of the two-world-view that representation produces and how it relates to the dramaturgical structure and esthetic intent of the performances, is, independently of which philosophical discourse we follow, urgently relevant. It illuminates how meaning ensues within an immanent process, how the understanding continuously swings between different levels of perception, and how the polyphonic, non-narrative structure of the performance provokes representation as such.

The requirements of representation produce rifts of different kinds. Rifts that all emerge from the notion of separation: a strict distinction between *a* world and the images it produces when perceived. This is what is referred to as a two-world-view and it is a notion that is incoherent with an immanent (creative) process – as well as with the esthetic/perceptive intent of the performances – for quite a few reasons. Maybe the most incoherent of these is that representation is based on the notion that what is expressed (image, movement, speech, sound) is there to replace something that exists in what we conceive as the real world, something that is missing, and in relation to which the expression can be judged. But there is no image that precedes the movement/activity of the performed, it does not stand for *something*, and there is no certainty of how it is going to unfold. The dramaturgical intent, or the expressive wish, if we want to call it that, is instead to find ways to disconnect the expression from anything outside its own presence. This is to say that what signifies the moment of the encounter is that it cannot be represented. It has a duration but, it is not moving in time: neither referring back to what lies in memory or to expectations of a future; it is nothing outside its precise unfolding.

As one of many examples of how a sequence of interpretation, invoked by representation, inevitably is trapped by the position of the perceiving gaze, it is worth turning to Jean-François Lyotard and his essay *Beyond Representation* where he, in quite a harsh way criticizes the attempt to apply a psychoanalytic approach to the understanding – and interpretation – of art, saying that it is an approach that “transforms entities of language, painting or music into signs or groups that *stand for* something else, and therefore treats the material and its organization as a surface to be penetrated, one finds the same prejudice: the notion that works has a substitutive or vicarious function. They are only there in place of a missing object, as the accepted formula has it; and they are there only *because* the object is missing” (Benjamin 1989, 158). Secondly, it can be claimed that a representational esthetic separates the world of the expression from the world of the perceiver, that it carries the dynamics of detachment, and thus guides the involvement in a specific way: it separates the subject from the object, and by doing so asserts values of a specific kind, like the object is the “knower” and the possible carrier of insights, hence denies the perceiving subject to rely on her own inner creation, her own inner makings of the experience. Thirdly, it can be argued that a representational esthetics creates the illusion of stable entities: the expression is one, and the world outside the expression is one, and that the dialectical relation between the two is what carries the meaning. If the expression, through representation, is given a stable status it reciprocally purports the notion of a stable perceiving subject in control of its origin, as well as its growing (expansion, development). Such an illusion of stability denies difference, it establishes unusable borders for understanding the notion of interconnectivity and continuous becoming. It is here we can turn back to the Deleuzian notion of difference and how it is captured by representation. Difference is behind everything as it is the movement of time through time, but it is also carries the infinite unstable becomings that are subsumed by the calculus of representation: ”From this, it is concluded that difference in itself remains condemned and must atone or be redeemed under the auspices of a reason which renders it livable and thinkable, and makes it the object of an organic representation” (Deleuze, 1994, 262).

What is the point of rendering this quite well established understanding of how a representational dynamic plays out within an artistic expression? Well, the main reason to locate these “rifts” caused by representation, is that it illuminates some of those forces that stand in the way, and that somehow have to be dealt with, if the intention is to pull the experience of the performance into a meeting in which an immanent process can happen in the exchange between the expression and the perceiver, similar to how it happens in the exchange between the performers. But then again, is that really a goal that is reachable? Is it not so that a non-representative esthetic, which implicitly is a critique of representation, also is locked within the workings of representation as it “takes place within, and is determined by, the field of representation itself, albeit a representation that is in crisis. We might say that the critique itself polices the possibilities of thought” (O’Sullivan 2006, 16). In the concreteness of theater making, where critical extrapolations and intellectual processes must be subordinate to and concur with the idea of contact, affect and communication (if we dare to use that word), the intricacy of such a critical observation can only be used as a substrate and as a reminder that radicalizations also have to be given a sequence of varied intensities.  

Representation is thus, irrespectively of how it is approached, a condition to which both the creative process and the expressive intent have to adapt. It exists on the level of corporality, on the level of the signified subjectivity of the character/performer and on the level of narration. The intensity of its grip varies depending on the expressive form: language constitutes one intensity, bodily expression another, music another, but these levels are related regarding enhancement, subordination and structural density, i.e. depend on and effect each other in respect to representation and to the production of meaning. This fact, the intricacy of the semiotic influence they assert on each other, should be thought of as one of the most important insights for a director to gain, since it constitutes one of the main resources for investigating, and altering, the dynamics of representation. Their interrelationship can be seen as making up the body onto which different operations can be made to create shifts and changes in the intensity of the representational grip. Such an observation is relevant both to a conceptual setup as well as to one of thorough composition, even though the concrete decisive operations are made on different levels.

The notion of operating on a body of art is, in this case, retrieved from Deleuze’s essay *One Less Manifesto* (1978), where he develops an in-depth critique of the esthetics of the Italian theater director/actor Carmelo Bene (1937–2002), and he does so in close relation to some of the core concepts developed in his philosophical work elsewhere. In this text Deleuze suggests, through his exploration of Bene’s theater work, different types of operations, or rather operational devices, which are: to subtract, to amputate, to minorate, and to stammer. These are terms – and directorial manipulations – that are tightly intertwined and complexly dependent on each other (they also generate adjunctive terms), but a simplified understanding of their objective is that they are activated in order to destabilize representation and to generate what Deleueze calls a movement of “continuous variation” and it is the enabling of this movement that is crucial for avoiding the rule of a representation (Murray 1997, 247). Another way of putting it is offered by Laura Cull when she suggests that Deleuze is “concerned with rethinking representation rather than rejecting it, and with reconsidering presence as a mutually transformative encounter between the different, rather than as an instance of recognition, identification, communication, communion or coincidence between a subject and an object” (Cull 2012, 5). The operational devices suggested by Deleuze are, to a certain degree, dependent on the kind of interpretational framework within which Bene’s work is situated, and therefore not immediately relevant to creative situations where newly-invented material (improvisations, chance operated sequences) are performed, but the notion of continuous variation surely is, as it encapsulates the intention to avoid the fixed, and encourages multiplicity in all aspects of the perceptive situation. In such an expressional movement it is not the text, and the semantic understanding of it that counts but rather its spatiotemporal continuity of variation, a variation that presupposes the extraction of constants. So, how can the concept of continuous variation be understood more precisely, within a compositional practice, i.e. separate from the perpetual production of difference happening in the world?<sup>199</sup> Deleuze guides us towards looking at the “geometry of speeds, intensities, and affects,” to find the answer (Murray 1997, 250). These are terms that can be more finely divided, hence thought of as rhythm (rhythmical structure), duration, phrasing, articulation, dynamics, timbre, tension, release, and the transformative relation between them all. The one observation he makes regarding the occurrence of continuous variation, underlying all the others, is that “two essential aims of the arts should be the subordination of form to speed, to the variation of speed, and the subordination of the subject to intensity or to affect, to the intense variation of affects” (Murray 1997, 249). This conjures up a picture of a structure that is more concerned with difference (variation of speeds) than clarity, and one that does not necessarily avoid the unbalanced as long as it has an expressive intensity and is clear of its affective intention. Such a structure can, rather elusively suggested by Deleuze, be generated through “sluggishness”; interruptions, cuts and recuts in the material. (Murray 1997, 250). Within such a structure there are two progressions of variations, moving simultaneously through time, that when combined create the rhythmical complexity, thus enhancing continuous variation: the variation of language and the variation of gesture. The sluggishness is therefore not necessarily caused by the specific quality of one of these two layers of variation but generated through their combined effect, *“forming one and the same continuum”* (Murray 1997 250).<sup>200</sup> What we get from this, in regards to how to ensure a quality of continuous variation, can be found in the implicit proclamation that the communicative intention should be subordinate to variation, i.e. to the vitality of disjunctive shifts regarding all the parameters, mentioned above. This can be attained both through detailed instruction/preparation of each expressive movement (thorough composition), or, which is the case in the performances we are looking at, through a conceptual setup where variation and disjunctiveness is an outcome of chance, game rules and improvisations. Deleuze also points to the possibilities of repetition (which certainly is a phenomena that can be recognized in stammering, as we know it in real life), and how variation can be obtained through shifts in duration and articulation in the same expressive figure. He makes the observation that “the same gesture or word is never repeated without obtaining different characteristics of time. This is the musical formula of continuity, or of form as transformation” (Murray 1997, 249). I also think that variation through repetition can be seen as a readiness to *move beyond what already has been done*, which is a stance closely related to – whatever compositional technique or conceptual setup we are referring to – the notion that the expression needs to be instilled with an energy of urgency, i.e. not only as a pre-shaped form, that ensures that *the choice of how to direct the utterance/gesture continuously is made in the present moment* (Petri 2015).

The above rendering of Deleuzian reasoning might be seen as a deviation as it does not point out, more specifically, how the different expressional components differ in respect to what degree they are caught in a representational grip, and it does not more precisely approach the question of how their interrelationship effects the rigidity of this grip. But what it does do, is highlight how operations that aim to create a destabilization of representation (where an immanent process happens), are about the extraction of constants and the rejection of reference points, and it also suggests that an alternative to a representational esthetics is the enabling of continuous and infinite variation. However, the extraction of constants and the rejection of reference points is not a formulation that can be used as an impetus for the individual performer (it cannot be the ground for an instruction), and neither is it relevant to use those terms to describe the intended perceptive effect. Instead, it is when creating the conceptual setup that the question of constants and reference points has to be met: Since control over the representational grip cannot be something that is dealt with on a level of detailed instructions, the destabilization needs to be instilled through the construct of the performance concept, which in turn is based on presumptions that certain juxtapositions create certain affects, in regards to representation.

## Concepts of Multiplicity - Pushing representation towards non-representation

The reflections on how the construct of the concepts – the playground for the performances – was thought of in respect to representation, has to commence with problematizing the idea of extraction of constants and the rejection of reference points. The reason for that is not only because these terms can signify operations and compositional manipulations of varied types, but also because, in a reversed way, they indicate that constants and reference points are phenomena that exert a transcendent force that can be eliminated, which is not possible. Instead they take on new forms, appear in new shapes, they are continuously created in the perceptive moment and this unstoppable process is what the dramaturgical thinking in the performances relies on. But these are intricate and intertwined perceptive and dramaturgical processes and a step-by-step reasoning might be useful.

The relevance of the terms is dependent on defining what it is - in the framework of theater art – that constitutes a constant and what it is that signifies a reference point. Is it the progression and causality of a narrative? Is it the stable delineation of a performing persona? Is it the causal interconnection between the performers/characters that we see on stage? Is it the rhythmical and temporal structure of the performance? Is it the constitution of the performance space? Whatever it is, the idea of extraction of constants and rejection of reference points can only be of use if understood as a deviation from a preconceived notion of the constitution of any of these (or other) aspects/phenomena: the expression takes on characteristics that exert imbalance and uncertainty because it deviates from a preconceived form. In the Delezian critique of Carmelo Bene, the extraction and rejection are connected to semantic language, to how it is used, enunciated, and performed in the theatrical situation.<sup>201</sup> Bene’s performative treatment causes an unbalanced expression through a “continuous variation on language, on all interior elements of language, phonological, syntactical, and semantic” (Murray 1997, 247).<sup>202</sup> Through this the constitution of the performing persona is destabilized and the perception of it cannot rest in a representational understanding of the semantic language, rather is drawn into a dynamic of a different presence. But the destabilization, with the extraction of constants and rejection of reference points as operational devices, can be aimed at different levels of the expression: on the level of the constitution of each different component (semantic language, as in the case of Bene, or the psychological constitution of a performing persona, or the rhythmical structure of a musical progression) or on the level of the expression as a whole. To exemplify this, and to put it in an historical perspective, we can turn to Erika Fisher-Lichte and her general observation that performance art since the 1960s has experimented with disconnecting “individual theatrical tools from their larger context.” In her rendering of a hypothetical performative sequence of such experimentation, the notion of a de-stabilized subject and the rejections of reference points are clearly prevalent, thus connecting it both to the Deleuzian critique, and to the production of meaning in a three dimensional polyphonic structure: “They have not only ceased to subordinate those tools to the logic of action and psychology but tried to liberate them from all causal interconnection. Following specific geometric or rhythmic patterns, or determined by chance operations, these elements appear in space, are stabilized for varying periods of time, and, in some cases, undergo a continuous process of transformation before they vanish again without a comprehensive reason or specific motivation for either appearing or disappearing. It seems that the appearing elements can largely, if not exclusively, be described as emergent phenomena. The emergence of the various elements leads to a process which, at first, seems paradoxical and which bears for the performances semioticity. Emerging in isolation, these elements appear de-semanticized because they are perceived in their specific materiality and not as carriers of meaning; they are neither put in relation to other elements nor to any other context. In this sense, the elements are insignificant – devoid of meaning” (Fisher-Lichte 2008, 140). From this image we can assume that the bodies are stable (constant) but that their interrelationships and their placement in the overall structure remain in flux. In other words, the extraction of constants equals the extraction of a single narrative, of a single focus, of a reference point of sorts.<sup>203</sup> These two examples operate with the extraction of constants and rejection of reference points by doing exactly that: creating destabilization by disposing certain factors that would put them in connection with a representational coding. In the case of Bene, an onomatopoetic approach deprives the language of its normal melodic and rhythmic structure, whereas in Fisher-Lichte’s hypothetical example of a collective expression any kind of over arching narrative is extracted. Precisely the same kind of dramaturgical thinking, as described in the Fisher-Lichte example, was applied in the performance of *Ryoanji – a Meeting*, as it did not supply the movements and all the performer interactions with a predetermined causality or an overarching narrative (her example could actually be said to, on a structural level, mirror the performance). Though, contrary to this strategy of elimination, the dramaturgical idea in the performance of *John and the Mushrooms* was instead to achieve the extraction of constants and rejection of reference points through an overload, by saturating the expression with multiple constants and multiple reference points. However, irrespectively if the extractions of constants and rejection of reference points are caused by a process of elimination or a process of overload their aim is the same: to place the expression in continuous variation, to allow for imbalance, hence to enable a pluralization of potential meaning.

The idea to counteract a representational coding through an overload needs to be understood beyond the structural principle of setting in motion multiple expressions simultaneously. It needs to be complemented with the understanding that each individual expression, as part of the polyphony, was instructed to not only carve out the specifically personal, but to see it as a free-standing entity, rather than as a complementary part (a cog in the wheel) to a collective movement, devoid of a personal urgency. This takes us back to the hypothetical example by Fisher-Lichte as quoted earlier, which must be understood (apart from telling about how experimentations around the individual and the collective has been going on in contemporary theater for quite a while) as descriptive of an expressive structure that has the intent to escape representation by transferring, elevating, the meaning away from the individual performer to the expression as a whole. The singular performer body is there – in its seemingly non-relational movements, characterized by a dismissal of the logic of action and psychology – to make a contribution to a collective expression that aims to encourage a co-compositional engagement and an opening up for a pluralization of potential meaning. In the absence of an expressive focus the audience are “being forced to independently prioritize their sensorial impressions” (Fisher-Lichte 2008, 33). It can thus be said that it is the performance itself, that takes on its own course, depriving everybody involved from any claim of transmission: it is a “third thing that is owned by no one, whose meaning is owned by no one, but which subsists between them, excluding any uniform transmission, any identity of cause and effect” (Rancière 2009, 15). Such a dynamic of de-subjectifying the individual performer, to transfer the meaning of the expression away from the personal to the collective expression, consequently differs from the directorial and dramaturgical intent in the performances we are referring to.<sup>204</sup>  Neither the conceptual setup, nor the instructions were aimed at reducing the individuality of the performer, or talked about in terms of non-representation. The intention was instead to combine concepts of a strictly formal kind in which improvisations could occur, with an emphasis on the performers subjective choices when forming the expressions. In such a construction, the extraction of constants and the rejection of reference points should be understood as an attempt to de-stabilize the representational aspect of the expression as a whole, but at the same time reciprocally complemented, or counter acted, by a strengthening of the performer’s individuality, thus making it the opposite of a structure in which the elimination of the subjectivity of each performer is the aim.<sup>205</sup> Therefore it can be said that overload, as a means to avoid a representational coding, was not thought of as something that happened solely as an outcome of setting in motion a multitude of non-representational expressions, but as an outcome of a multitude of urgent personal expressions of a more or less representational kind. The performance as a “third thing” can thus be seen as owned by everyone.

All the different expressive components simultaneously occurring in the performances – bodily expressions, semantic expressions, musical expressions – surely effected each other in regards to representation: certain juxtapositions had the potential of being captured by a representational coding, others less so.<sup>206</sup> But the construct of the concepts did not control how the different components came into play, i.e. how they were combined, since they emerged from a process of chance and improvisation. The concepts “only” had control over which material could be inserted, but even that control was limited as the possibilities for the performers to create their own material (*Ryoanji – A Meeting*, *vorschläge*) or interpret instructions/text (*John and the Mushrooms*) in an unencumbered way, were plenty. With the music it was different. Both the performances *John and the Mushrooms* and *Ryoanji – A Meeting* were conceptualized around specific musical compositions, chosen for their particular expressive qualities, and this, combined with the fact that the influence of music on the representational aspect is crucial, makes it important to examine the role of the music.  However, this is not the place for a thorough musical analysis of the compositions that were included. Instead the analysis is limited to its general mode and the overall structural specifics regarding rhythm and intensity, which anyway, is the most relevant approach as those specifics stand in the foreground and have the strongest impact in regards to representation.  The music in the performances *Ryoanji – A Meeting* and *John and the Mushrooms* were chosen from the oeuvre of John Cage and included compositions spanning from his early years to those written towards the end of his working life, but still similar in regards to important structural and expressive aspects.<sup>209</sup> Generally, and simply described, their structure and mode have an even metric construct, devoid of melodic phrasing and harmonic progressions, a lack of musical dialectics, and are very condensed in timbre.<sup>210</sup> The fact that the music is not built on melodic or harmonic progressions (no signs of a suspension/resolution dynamic), and that it presents a unique musical language with few kindred examples, gives it an expression without semiotic signals or narratives, but instead rests heavily on its materiality.<sup>211</sup> Put together, these characteristics not only strongly reduce a representational coding, but they effect all the surrounding expressions in the same direction. In my directorial thinking the choice to let a musical expression of this kind dominate the expression of the performances, allowed for the other components to actually take on a representational quality without necessarily being drawn into a representational coding. The music was hence thought of as exerting a counter force. To deepen the understanding of this dynamic it is constructive to move into the aspect of rhythm.

## Rhythm and Representation

The rhythm carries the meaning.<sup>212</sup> Rhythm is the foundation of performative transmodality. The concept of rhythm encapsulates everything from the smallest detail in the shaping of each expressive component, to the overarching dramaturgy of duration, and therefore it is an aspect of composition that throughout history has been central in most genres.<sup>213</sup>  In a performative expression, it is the rhythmical aspect, regardless if the material is representational or non-representational, that places it in a present moment. It could also be said that it is the rhythmical handling of material with a representational coding that offers the possibility to push/move/transform it into a non-representational domain. At the same time it could be argued that rhythm has the capacity to infuse a non-representational material with a representational coding. Rhythm can therefore be said to be of crucial importance in the discussion on how to entangle representation as a force.

In the multiplicity of expressive events happening simultaneously in the performances that we are looking at, there is consistency, of a dis-connective type. Nothing has to be done – by the performers or the spectator – to assure this. All occurrences are in what Brian Massumi would call “relations-of-nonrelations,” and these relations find their consistency through time without any investment, or attention given to them (Massumi 2011). This is an ontological observation and not congruous with the perceptive experience, in which the inclination is to *search* for a consistency, from which meaning can be derived and experienced. Crucial in that perceptive activity is the notion – and experience – of rhythm. The definition of rhythm, useful in the framework of theatrical composition, cannot however be based on the proportional metric system used in music analysis, but instead it needs to be defined in such a way that it refers to the experience of impressions coming together. Filmmaker and theorist Trinh T. Minh-ha offers an inspiring and coherent starting point for such an extended definition:
>Rhythm relegated to the realms of music and poetry is often thought of as a mere arty device, bound to notions of meter, measure, pattern, and symmetry; while the sense of rhythm is either reduced to a technical musical ability or mystified as a godsend, that is, a gift one is either naturally endowed with or not at all. For me, such a narrow understanding of rhythm is indicative of the degree of which we revel in ignorance when it comes to non-verbal communication. I would say that rhythm is what basically determines the “quality” of social relationships and of artistic manifestations. What makes work “inspiring” is not the idea, the vision, the information, the insight, or the craft per se. It is how all these unexpectedly click in, come apart, meet halfway, and so on; in other words, how they do and undo one another in their diversified movements, forming a strong assemblage of *No Thing*, rather than of *nothing*. This is rhythm. (Thrinh T. Minh-ha 1992, 261)

What is highly relevant in this observation is that the notion of rhythm should be seen through the lens of relations. All the different parameters of the expressive matters that are produced in the performances constitute relations of different kinds and quality, and it is the aspect of rhythm that lies in the forefront for how these relations are experienced.<sup>214</sup> In a multilayered expressional structure, characterized by superimpositions, rhythmical balance of a metric and more recognizable kind, is more or less absent. Rather, as we saw in the reasoning around consistency and consolidation (*Who is the Creator?*), it is qualities of disjunctiveness and collision that dominate the rhythmical relations. Rhythm is not something that is created, it is not a specific type of time-organization; it occurs between events inevitably and unconditionally. The rhythmical relations between the different expressions that the performers create is of this nature and, as we noted before, the process and challenge for the performer is to open up for this “new” unorganized (chaotic) structure and to recognize its relational potentiality. In order to take this further and connect it to our main focus, we need to somehow define the connection between rhythmical structures and representation, between rhythm and the experience of a present moment, and its influence on the experience of contact. In other words, *not* expand the question into how rhythmical relations are formed and developed within the collective expression, but how different rhythmical structures are co-composed and experienced by the individual in the audience.

The rhythmical relationship between the different elements in a performance creates a temporal structure that the spectator, more or less intuitively reacts to and, for instance, experiences as choppy or unhurried, as fast or sudden. It is created by numerous, simultaneously occurring and independent parameters: the voice (one or more concurrent voices), movements of the body/bodies, music (with its own multilayered rhythm structure), light and the scenographic elements. Our need of integrality and continuity causes us to rhythmically link together all these elements that move through the time span of the performance. In the performances that we are looking at, because of the superimpositions, the process of rhythmically linking different instances together happens on multiple levels. The first can be said to be the expressive trajectory, formed by the individual performer, in which there is a sensed time contour with shifts and changes experienced as rhythm. That singular expressive sequence is mono-linear but it can be polyrhythmic, and in the perceptive moment the shifts and changes happening in that sequence are linked together.<sup>215</sup> It is what Daniel Stern talks about as the perceptive process of “chunking,” which is “the work of the present moment. It is the basic building block of psychologically meaningful subjective experiences that extend in time” (Stern 2004, 44). As the performances consist of many such individually shaped sequences, the perceptive linking has a more complex character in which the co-compositional activity/investment is central. The rhythm of one sequence is superimposed on the others, and in this turbulence the co-compositional activity is about the attention given to certain occurrences and not to others. Hence, the rhythmical experience, due to the many rhythmical “alternatives,” is a reduction, a concentration, of the overload. Certain relations are enhanced depending on the direction of the attention. The perceiving subject, in “search” of rhythm – and meaning – creates consolidation out of the multitude, and this process is the process of attentively, co-creatively placing one temporal structure in relation to another. The rhythm is there to be found, or maybe one could say chosen. The performance generates and offers multiple alternatives, and the experience of rhythm is then dependent on which relations are co-composed by the perceiving subject.

When Erika Fisher Lichte says that the “rhythm of the performance collides with the various rhythms of each individual spectator,” one can assume that she is referring to a performance that has one dominant rhythmic structure. One, more or less defined, rhythmical movement in the performance: A rhythm with a mono-linear structure – even if instances of a polyrhythmic character can be part of it – which is carried forward by the ensemble (Fisher-Lichte 2008, 136). If the rhythmical consolidation of such an expression has a predetermined progression, and is more or less fixed in regards to how the sequence proceeds, we can talk about it as a “structured rhythm” (Petri 2012). The structured rhythm is not receptive to outside influence, but shaped by the different expressive materials, *and* by decisions made by the actors and director, sequences that comprise the intricate conflation of voice (text/music) and bodily movement in the ensemble. Consequently, the rhythm in these sequences does not consciously open up to what is happening outside the rehearsed sequence.<sup>216</sup> It is consolidated before the meeting with the audience, it radiates its own stability, and it emphasizes the border between the performance and the audience, which is most likely the reason why “it collides with the various rhythms of each individual spectator.” This is not applicable to the performative situations that we are looking at, in which multiple expressive trajectories are in motion. They are uncontrollable poly-poly-rhythmical structures.<sup>217</sup>  The discrete sequence created by the individual performer is improvised and the rhythm of it is instantly composed, thus controlled by that individual. But, the playing out of the superimpositions, the rhythmical sum, so to speak, is out of the control of everybody involved. The situation is, from a relation-of-nonrelation aspect, *not* rhythmically unstable, but the perceptive experience is, until the spectator creates her own reduction. In the multiplicity of expressive events happening simultaneously, the notion of rhythm is therefore not something that can be defined as one sequence, as an entity/movement or as something that is stable *or* unstable.

Installing this wavering quality – the destabilization of rhythm through the extraction of reference points – was a way to suppress a representational coding and allow for movements in search of continuous variation. Though, even if a clear delineation in regards to representation cannot be based on an analysis of the consolidating factors of the rhythmical structure, it *is* possible to assume that the experience of contact and the performance–audience relation changes depending on if the rhythmical structure is a “structured rhythm” that is possible to engage in if it is simply paid attention to, *or* if the experience of rhythm emerges out of the co-compositional activity.<sup>218</sup> The different affective effect, the dramaturgical impact, of these two alternatives was something that I worked with in both *John and the Mushrooms* and *Ryoanji – A Meeting*. I imagined that the possibility to experience the shift between the two structures could actually be seen as part of the continuous variations and thus vitalize the engagement in the co-compositional activity. The rhythmical-dramaturgical thinking was also based on the idea that the difference between a conventional rhythmical unity and an expression built on improvisation and multiple trajectories would enhance the perceptive sensitivity for experiencing the relations-of-nonrelations as relations of a confirmative kind. In the two performances, these rhythmical references – the structured rhythm – look different, but in the theoretical exploration they are akin in regards to how they can be seen as factors of tension and release. In the performance of *John and the Mushrooms* the sections with superimpositions and expressive multiplicity ended with the ensemble jointly performing the third movement of Cage’s composition *Living Room Music*. It is an *a cappella* movement where the four percussion players (which is the instrumentation for the composition) use their voices to perform a strictly composed version of a Gertrude Stein text. Its rhythmical structure is quite simple and all subdivisions are metrically even. The impression of its compositional autonomy – and of its excluding character – was further enhanced by the fact that the ensemble performed it more or less with their backs to the audience. LINK to A Story in John and the Mushrooms Kom ihåg! The shift in the rhythmical structure in the performance of *Ryoanji – A Meeting* differed, but only in some ways. The section of rhythmical unity, mirroring the one in *John and the Mushrooms* just mentioned, grew less sharply out of the ongoing musical composition (*Ryoanji*). It tapped into the percussion part and was more of a shift in perspective – an illumination of the slow and steady, but subdued, perpetual movement that ran throughout the performance. In contrast to the liveliness of *A Story* in *John and the Mushrooms* its ‘togetherness’ was manifested in what could be described as a stillness. Just like the musicians, the dancers took a position from which they concentratedly, and with an inward focus, listened and played on stones in unison with the other performers.<sup>219</sup>  LINK to Ryoanj – A Meeting, everybody playing stones Kom ihåg!

In both examples, the experience of a metrically even structure thus becomes an ordering of sorts. They constitute a directorial measure that changes the quality of the performance-spectator contact in so far that the representational coding of the rhythmically stable sequences undermine the experience of a present moment: There is no perceptive action, only reaction. The rhythmical consolidation is not an outcome of co-composition but of thorough composition. And, this reaction, contrary to the perceptive dynamic of the multiplicity, carries the potential to generate a sense of perceptive communality. The construction of the rhythm of the performance can therefore be seen as a dramaturgical tool not only for the production of meaning but also for shaping/shifting the social experience.

This implicitly suggests that there is not much to gain from talking about the experience of rhythm as an experience of rhythm. And, *especially* so in a perceptive situation dominated by an overload of unprepared occurrences and in which the experience of rhythm is an outcome of co-composed reduction. Should it instead be talked about as an experience of time? As an experience of duration?<sup>220</sup> What would such a shift infuse into a dramaturgical discourse? Laura Cull queries if theater performances can offer us “the chance to know more of what time is, but specifically in a lived rather that representational sense?” (Cull, 2012, 182). Is the elusive concept of time really useful when looking at the relation between compositional structures and the perceptive outcome? The sense of time is subordinate to the sense of change and change is rhythm. From a directorial, dramaturgical point of view, rhythm encapsulates an experience, but the concept of time does not. Assumptions can be made on what the rhythm *does* to the audience and to their experience of the performance. Like, that it directs and redirects attention, shifts the meaning, changes the atmosphere, that rhythm can alter the sensitivity of everyone present, and changes the experience of the body/bodies. But, when the expressive creation – and the perception of it – emerges in a mode of immanence and multiplicity, the validity of those assumptions is radically reduced. The experience becomes so diversified, so fully divided into individually differentiated experiences, that the interesting dramaturgical question is not to ask what rhythm does, but how it is perceptively formed. To do so is to affirm the openness of the immanent expression/perception and it points out that, it is the “vitality affect” that is the goal, not the experience of specific rhythms.

The concept *vitality affect* is retrieved from psychologist Daniel Stern’s extensive work on the nature of the present moment.<sup>221</sup> Its connection to the experience of rhythm, as a feeling, and how it places rhythm within a conceptual framework, enhances this work when pondering over the affective effect of immanent creation/perception. Stern says that everything “we do, see, feel, and hear from people has a temporal contour. We also attribute contours to many events in nature. We are immersed in a ‘music’ of the world at the local level – a complex polyphonic, polyrhythmic surround where different temporal contours are moving back and forth between the psychological foreground and background. These temporal contours of stimulations play upon and within our nervous system and are transposed into contours of feelings in us. It is these contoured feelings that I am calling vitality affects. They are the complement to temporal contours. In other words, by temporal contour, I mean the objective changes (even small) over time (even short) of intensity or quality of the stimulation (internal or external). By vitality affect, I mean the subjectively experienced shifts in internal feeling states that accompany the temporal contour of the stimulus” (Stern 2004, 64). This is a description of a perceptive dynamic as it transpires in life. It can occur as “a rush of anger or joy, a sudden flooding of light, an accelerating sequence of thought, a wave of feeling evoked by music, a surge of pain” (Stern 2004, 64). So, the vitality affect is there whether we want it or not, as soon as our senses open. But it is not necessarily experienced as rhythm, it is a chaos that “becomes rhythm, not inexorably, but it has a chance to. Chaos is not the opposite of rhythm, but the milieu of all milieus. There is rhythm whenever there is a transcoded passage from one milieu to another, a communication of milieus, coordination between heterogeneous space-times.” (Deleuze, and Guttari 2004, 345). In the performances, immersed in the totality of the multiple expressions, the experience of rhythm is the result of the co-composed relations that each individual in the audience makes. From my directorial point of view, the thinking and treatment of rhythm in such a situation, cannot be concerned with the carving out of specific rhythmical sequences (i.e. determining relations) but must focus on enabling a free flow of variations, of speeds and slowness, of articulation and dynamics. It is within the richness of expressional shifts and changes that the possibilities of rhythm resides, and on which the vitality affect depends.

The nature of the vitality affect cannot be predetermined, neither in the experience of a structured rhythm or co-composed. It is always individual. Though, as mentioned earlier, the vitality affect of the co-composed is fully diversified and evades assumptions, as it ensues from the subjectively, co-composed linkages that are made. The making of those linkages is the “acting” of the vitality affect. It is the experiential reward of co-composing, what bounces back. Daniel Stern says that this “acting” carries the feeling of leaning forward across the present moment, and that it provides “a line of dramatic tension that gives a feeling-coherence to the unfolding of the present moment. The vitality affect acts like a temporal backbone on which the plot is hung. They also help the chunking process by containing the phrase within one envelope. They give the present moment the dramatic feel of a lived history.” (Stern 2004, 70) To connect the perception of the expressive materiality of the performance, and the experience of vitality affect, to a feeling of drama and “lived history,” takes us back to the question of representation. It indicates that the non-meaning, the abstractness, finds its representation in the vitality affect.

## It comes and goes

The above attempt to attach the production of meaning to an immanent, co-composed rhythmical experience is done only to suggest that the workings of representation are not something that can be dealt with conclusively, like asserting that certain expressive configurations automatically evade a representational coding, while others do not. Though, this was not an issue that stood out when working with the performances; the concept of representation was not actively included, in the directorial thinking or in the dialogue/process within the ensembles. Instead, our thoughts and formulations revolved around creating the new and unexpected, the never-before-experienced. Such an experimental ambition grew out of the irritating observation that it “is strange that aesthetics (as a science of the sensible) could be founded on what can be represented in the sensible” (Deleuze, 1994, 56). But an escape from representation cannot be a goal in itself, it cannot be made into a doctrine, as this would indicate a kind of continuously present judgmental gaze on both the quality of the expression and on how it is perceived and understood: Are I/we creating a non-representational expression now? Does the audience comprehend this beyond a representational coding? If such a judgment were inserted, the strength and expressive potential of the individual performers would be immediately impaired. It would point to the idea that, if only representation is erased, if the sensible is taken out, then the expression can unfold on its own terms. This procedure is not much better, as it would initiate an “attempt to withdraw the pure sensible from representation and to determine it as that which remains once representation is removed (a contradictory flux, for example, or a rhapsody of sensations)” (Deleuze, 1994, 56). Representation is thus a malediction to which the creation has to atone, and in the full complexity of the performance situation, it is perhaps sufficient to assume that the intensity of the representational grip is something that constantly shifts, that there is a continuously shifting relationship between subject/object and materiality/ semioticity, and therefore the workings of representation, so to speak, come and go. Therefore, it might be useful to ask if the concept of representation, in a performative event dominated by a non-representative esthetic and with an intention to instigate an immanent process happening in the exchange between the expressive matter and the audience, can be replaced with the notion of presence, or more specifically, the present moment, understood as descriptive of an experience of being part of the unfolding? In other words, a discourse that looks at how the event unfolds, and how this unfolding is experienced. A constructive entrance point, from this perspective, is to look at the relation between instability/stability and the experience of presence.  

In the performance of *John and the Mushrooms* there were certain sequences that had a predetermined progression, hence more or less fixed in regards to how the sequence proceeded. They were not receptive to outside influence, but shaped by the structure of the different expressive material, and by decisions made by the actors and director, sequences (theater workers often use the word “blocking”) that comprise the intricate conflation of voice (text/music) and bodily movement in the ensemble. Consequently, the unfolding of these sequences did not consciously open up to what was happening around them.<sup>222</sup>  A structure such as this is consolidated before the meeting with the audience. It radiates its own stability, and it emphasizes the border between the performance and the audience.  Those structures that emerged out of an immanent process were clearly different in dynamic. They grew from improvisations generated by different instructions, and moved forward through individual creative initiatives that were more or less influenced, more or less in contact with, the surrounding expressions. A third type of structure, distinctly different from the first, emerged through an interaction – and attempt to connect – with the audience. Such structures open the process up even more to something the performers do not have control over. Their stability depends on the nature of the responses, thus giving them a dialogic quality.<sup>223</sup>  

This hasty delineation of expressive/rhythmical structures, and how they ensue, should not be understood as allocating one type to the notion of representation, and the others to the notion of non-representation. Surely, it is clear that a predetermined structure connotes a two-world-view – which relates it to a representational esthetic – and it is also clear that the third example is less likely to be captured by a representational coding as it moves forward through unknown and various types of impetus. But all three have the capacity to provoke representation, if defined as a faithful copy or replication of the actual (i.e. the strict distinction between a world and the images it produces), and all three can serve as vehicles for a representational esthetic.  So, even if a clear delineation in regards to representation cannot be based on an analysis of the consolidating factors of the expressive structure, it is possible to acknowledge the different types of performance–audience relations that they generate, relations that differ regarding the quality and experience of contact and the experience of the present moment. What is that difference then? Well, in the first example (a predetermined progression) the experience of contact equals attention. The expressive/ rhythmical structure is the way it is, right there, possible to engage in (listening, looking), if attention is paid to it. It is placed in its own time, it has its own duration and whether it enhances the experience of the present moment has nothing to do with its structure, only with the intensity of attention and engagement. The quality of the contact is then ruled by the terms of the performance, and can thus be said to constitute an opportunity for the audience to “dance along”. Here, the expressions unfold independently and therefore radically reduce the experience of a present moment, as a unique occurrence.<sup>224</sup> The second example is a structure that is continuously in an unstable state, primarily because the performers are involved in instant composition, where mistakes, collisions, disruptions and misunderstandings are part of the consolidating process. It is a sequence that does not consciously open up to what is happening outside the group of performers, but since the awareness among the performers of the emerging process is geared towards change, and is searching for responses and relations, the sensitivity to what is going on in the space, as a whole, is heightened. For the performers the immanent process carries an enhanced focus on the present moment since there is constant uncertainty about how it is going to precede, which infuses the expression with a tension, that is in turn, sensed by the audience. The instability of this structure and its flexibility regarding contact, between the performers and the performers/audience, intensifies the experience of the unfolding and subsequently of the present moment. The third structure is not necessarily more unstable then the second but, since it ensues from the momentum of the audience, the experience of its unfolding is more direct. As the instability of this structure, and its transformation into a (stable) expressive form, is a shared experience that pulls the event into a sense of togetherness, the sense of the present moment is potentially more intense. The first two structures can assumedly generate an oscillating movement between different experiences of time, and of the engagement in – and separation from – the present moment, something like: “I” engage in the concreteness of the activity, the materiality of the event; “I” let what I perceive generate an assumption of what is going to happen, or an assumption of why it is happening/done; “I” then move “my” attention back to the concreteness of the expressive movement. The third structure, however, does not allow such an oscillating movement to the same extent, which can be understood as a consequence of the “demands” of the present.<sup>225</sup>   

The notion of the present moment within the context of the experience of art is problematized by Simon O’Sullivan in his reasoning that the experience of the present is inaccessible to consciousness and all we ever have “is its trace (we experience passing moments),” as a “kind of echo, the representation, of affect”  (O’Sullivan 2006, 44). To enhance the experience of the present through deconstruction of the artifact is then in vain as it is always “predetermined by the discourse that surrounds it. The event as always already ‘captured’ by representation” (O’Sullivan 2006, 45). To leave out, to reject, the problems attached to representation and instead redirect the problematizing gaze towards the quality and intensity of the contact between the performance and its audience, then becomes an attempt to rescue theater from this double bind: it shows a disinterest in anything other than in the quality of the meeting and in the possibilities of an expansive experience. Or as O’Sullivan optimistically puts it, we need to see the event “as something genuinely unexpected” (O’Sullivan 2006, 45).

Considering all the above, it is reasonable to say that the question of representation is not immediately connected to the emergence of an immanent process happening in the exchange between the performance and the audience. But the dynamics of a two-world-view, of the idea that the performance is replacing something that is considered as real, does steer the perception into a mediation that is dependent on phenomena outside the materiality of the event, which in turn reduces the possibilities for an exchange, of sorts, to happen. Since expectations on art are so predominantly representational – after all, we live in a representational world – the search for meaning when experiencing the movement and language of the performance can, to a certain degree, be expected to stymie presence. Hence, a sensible observation could be that the escape from representation comes in spurts, and that the immanent process follows the same phrasing, so to speak. Consequently, the compositional/esthetic challenge is not only to be aware of the dynamics of representation, but to accept them as a precondition from which the dramaturgical structure has to grow.

## The notion of Potentiality

The potential in and correlation between a dramaturgy that relies on the structuring faculty of each individual and an immanent perspective, is pointed out by Laura Cull when she says that, after “all, an immanent view insists on a fundamental connectedness between the apparently unconnected, and a shared nature among the seemingly opposed or discrete, which must include participatory performance and ‘observed theatre’ (or works of art designed for contemplation rather than participation). That is to say, an immanent perspective is inherently participatory in outlook – not only thinking in terms of a continuum of tendencies between the two poles of immanent participation and transcendent separation, but also construing participation (or immanence) as the more fundamental of the two tendencies. Or again, according to thinkers of immanence, it is not that we begin with separate things (such as an actor and ‘an audience member’), which then take part in each other in a manner that presents participation as derivative of the participants. Rather, immanence suggests that participants are produced by processes of participation. As such, our question should not be ‘What is participatory performance?’ (to which the answer would be ‘everything’), but ‘Why (and under which circumstances) do some performances appear nonparticipatory?’ and ‘What types of participants do different performances produce?’(Cull 2012, 146).<sup>226</sup>

There is a lot to find in this reflection by Cull. Two things in particular stand out as most valid for this problematization. First, that the concept of participation is related to acknowledging “a fundamental connectedness between the apparently unconnected,” and thus participation is about inventing relations, which in turn makes it possible to replace the concept of participation with co-composition, or co-creation. Secondly, and inevitably, is that participation/co-composition in a theater performance, is as much an inward movement (within each individual) as it is a concrete and noticeable engagement.<sup>227</sup> It is then reasonable to think about this mute and ineffable extension of “the apparently unconnected,” of the non-narrativity of the expressive structure, as the *pre-narrative of the experienced*. The non-narrative cannot possibly be just that, but instead it is what comes before, hence the idea of the non-narrative is erased, taken away as useless, just like the idea of unconnectedness. Everything that is done, that is expressed, lies before meaning. Meaning is an outcome of “using” the expression beyond its limits, which mirrors Cage’s stance that “meaning was determined by use, not by intention” (Retallack 1996, xiv). That is also in line with how Fisher-Lichte extends her reasoning (in the quote above) by asserting that the meaning of such a performative sequence is produced through its materiality, and that each perceiving subject is triggered to create and experience her/his own “associations, ideas, thoughts, memories and emotions,” thus enabling connections to be made to various other experiences/ phenomena (Fisher-Lichte 2008, 140).

This radically condensed outline of the perceptive sequence, that the dramaturgical construct relied on, is however, truly insufficient for illuminating the esthetic intention of the performances. The idea that the structuring faculty of the individual in the audience has the potential to produce causality and meaning out of multiple and simultaneously occurring expressions, does not take us anywhere. It emphasizes the inherent potential in the individual, but that is not enough of a foundation for creating a performance. Yes, the perceiving mind does whatever it can to figure out, to invent connections between the different components, but in order to extend that theory into an esthetic criticism of sorts, it is necessary to recognize that what comes out of this inherent potential – as an experience – is totally dependent on what goes in, in other words, determined by the specific quality of the different expressive components. And it is this aspect that takes us further, beyond a general observation, into the directorial thinking. The reason for this is that the specificity of the components – chosen and inserted by me as director – not only steers the intensity and atmosphere of the performance but also the type of relations that the co-compositional investment generates. Why did I choose these particular components, and not other ones? In what direction were the chosen components anticipated to steer the co-composition? Well, the choice of components derives firstly from their specific qualities, as singular entities: I like them, they are chosen because there is something in them that attracts me, or something that confuses me, or something that intrigues me to investigate, and/or they generate a particular performer energy. But the choice of components also derives from the assumption that, together, they have the potential to create a special kind of world in which connections between seemingly contradictory expressions/phenomena can be made, thus a possibility to expand the expression/experience into the un-thought, the un-imagined.<sup>228</sup> The potential is, in other words, twofold: the potential to compile and conjoin the seemingly unconnected (the structuring faculty) and the potential inherent in the quality of each expressive component.

In the performance of *John and the Mushrooms* the different pieces of material related to the thinking, esthetics and methods of John Cage. The choices grew out of my reading, my understanding of his work, as well as the inspirational sources it generated, but all distinctly attached to Cage’s esthetic abode. The co-compositional possibilities, the experiential outcome of the structuring faculty, was thus thought of as a means to make connections both explicitly akin to the ones Cage himself made, but also in a mode of experimentation, similar to his. The possibilities of the co-compositional activity was clearly then not limitless, but carried the potential of unpredictability as it allowed for combining and placing together components that are usually seen through a discrete and particular lens.

In the performance of *Ryoanji – A Meeting* the structural setup with multiple expressions simultaneously moving through space, mirrors the one in *John and the Mushrooms*, but the quality of the materials were dissimilar. There was not a collection of different musical compositions but just one with a very undifferentiated timbre and concentrated atmosphere. No words were spoken, and no props of a realistic nature were to be seen in the space. Bodies were moving, dancing. Wooden “shields” were present and carried around and white masks put in front of the performers faces. This gamut of expressions and “things” was created/inserted to trigger the co-compositional activity to move with a different intensity and along different paths, than in the performance of *John and the Mushrooms*. The potential of the structuring faculty was presumed to generate possible images of the performers' inner narration and emotions, of their relations, and of their subjective and collective development. From a dramaturgical/perceptive point of view the co-composition was thus consciously placed on a very unstable plane, but a plane I anticipated/hoped would be experienced as “the pleasure of uncertainty”. My thinking around the potentiality of the structuring faculty, the willingness to co-create, when the material is of such an ephemeral nature, as in *Ryoanji – A Meeting*, revolves around exactly this; how to ensure the possibility of experiencing the uncertain, the untold, as something that is pleasant to be in the midst of. In the case of that performance, I wanted the concentrated musical atmosphere to create a mode of stable breathing, a vessel in which the perceiving subject could hold, and transcode, the diverse and multifaceted impressions. So, once again, we see a possible reciprocity between the potential of co-composition, and the potential of the material.

The image that is conjured up when imagining a polyphony of expressions moving through space and time, can very well be an image of continuous variation but deprived of meaning. That is certainly not my intention in setting it in motion. Instead it is an attempt to introduce a possible world made up of the chosen components – and all their infinite combinations. The perception of such an expression “will no longer be a window onto some outside world; it will itself be an encounter or event of difference, an active or desiring becoming. Not a perception and then the object perceived, but interacting perceptions each producing itself and its other through the encounter. On a univocal plane of being we do not divide the world into perceivers and perceived; there are just perceptions from which relatively stable points are effected. Imagine if we could perceive all differences that confront us: each ray of light, each sound wave. We would not have a ‘world’ so much as a vast and chaotic influx of data. We perceive ‘things’ by slowing difference down. Deleuze also uses the word ‘contraction’ to describe the ways in which one living being manages to form or experience its world from the flow of difference and becoming.” (Colebrook, 2002, 35) This quote does not directly relate to esthetic criticism but renders, in a highly condensed way, a Deleuzian view on how the human structuring faculty handles all the infinite movements moving on a univocal plane of being. As such, it emphasizes the grounds on which the dramaturgical thinking is based, and interestingly, it implicitly asserts – just like the introductory quote by Cage – that if the structure of the composition is shaped in such a way that it takes on some kind of responsibility to replace, or precede, the human structuring faculty, it renounces the potential of the spectator. It, so to speak, simplifies *before* it is contracted, slowed down, by the human structuring faculty, which results in experiential malnutrition. If the claim then is that this deficiency can be counteracted, by setting in motion expressive structures of multiplicity and superimposition, how can the notion of meaning be introduced as it is renounced by such directorial measures? What can be said, really, about the activity of co-composition? Is it happening and what does it produce? How can we talk about meaning when clearness and distinctness are not part of the equation and the formative potential of the expression lies beyond its constitution? Can we talk about meaning in the same sense as we do in situations where signs and languages are used within established semiotic systems? Must not the whole idea of meaning be placed outside those systems and instead formulated in relation to the perceptual circumstances? I think so. Meaning cannot be thought of as a “thing” but the experience of process, a process with two closely intertwined strands: the process of the co-compositional activity and the process of becoming.

The process of co-composition has been outlined as the individual creating relations between the different components in the performance. The value of being immersed in such a process – which is the reason why it is thought of as replacing the notion of meaning – is that it holds the potential to experience the invention of something new. Such a perceptive possibility stems from the idea that to be *at all* “is to be active in a production of novelty consisting in the transformation of the potential into the actual.” (Massumi, 2011, 1) In order to connect this idea of being active in the production of novelty, to the notion of becoming entails initially to recognize all occurrences as part, and as an outcome, of processes. To do so is to not believe in things but that “objects are derivatives of process and that their emergence is the passing result of specific modes of abstract activity. This means that objects’ reality does not exhaust the range of the real. The reality of the world exceeds that of objects, for the simple reason that where objects are, there has also been their becoming. And where becoming has been, there is already more to come. The being of an object is an abstraction from its becoming” (Massumi 2011, 6). The things are then not things, they are their becoming, and placed within perception I see this processual motion as the transforming of the sensed materiality (the concreteness of the performance) into its not yet reached form (its culmination) in the experience: the reality of the performance exceeds its occurrence.<sup>229</sup> This is to say that if/when art (the performance) is sensed as becoming - as a continuous (abstract) process of change and transformation – it has the potential to infuse an intuitive understanding of being as becoming. The thing (the performance) is “*taken for* an object but given potential by the next occasion’s becoming,” to use the words of Massumi (Massumi 2011, 9). This “next occasion’s becoming” I think of as the active perceptive presence (co-composition) in the production of novelty, and its potential is determined by how it is effectively taken up, as a relay experience feels its way into its (new) occurrence (Massumi 2011).

The notion of becoming is then twofold: the event unfolding, unstoppable and everywhere, continuously becoming and the actual experience of this unfolding creating a *sense* of becoming in the perceiver: the creative participation in the production of novelty. Such is the experiential (experimental) intention behind the making of the performances.  Replacing the concept of meaning with the concept of process is consequently not enough, instead the formulation should be: *The potential of meaning within the experience of process*.

## Coda (Maybe fear guides the idea?)

Placing the potential of meaning within the experience of process means that the answer to the question that I started this reasoning with – Can an immanent process of building within the ensemble be mirrored in the moment of perception? – lies  hidden within the potential of each individual. The potential is the unknown, the potential is the hoped for, the potential is a promise. In my practice and esthetic thinking this certainly goes two ways: as a director, I want to move beyond my own limitations, but I also want to create situations where the potential of the audience is activated beyond the known. We might call this the dream of the potential, which I think is the radiance of Brian Massumi’s comment when he says that we “never just register what’s actually in front of our eyes. With every sight we see imperceptible qualities, we abstractly see potential, we implicitly see a life dynamic, we virtually live relation. It’s just a kind of shorthand to call it an object. It’s an event. An object’s appearance is an event, full of sorts of virtual movement” (Massumi 2011, 43). But *within* the reciprocity, inherent in the possibility of an immanent creative process being mirrored in the moment of perception, lies a dream of a meeting: a meeting in the present, that replaces representation. A meeting not with something clearly specified, but a meeting with the experience of the unfolding. This meeting is the meeting in the space, yes, but the meeting is then also the meeting with the newly made, with relations of a new kind.

These are elusive formulations that somehow contradict the technical intricacy of the reasoning I have presented above, but they are intended to indicate what I think is at stake. Let me put it this way: Whether there is an immanent process of building happening in the exchange between the performance and the audience, whether there is an experience of becoming, is not what is important. Instead it is *the structural effects of trying to create it* that are interesting, since it cracks the material – as well as the creative and perceptive process – open. In order to attach such a thought to the world outside the theatrical experience, it is constructively provocative to imply that there is a fear underlying such an attempt: the fear that, if divisions are created in the performance – in the world – they cannot be overcome. A fear that separation becomes the ruling paradigm, because “if you start by presupposing a subject-object divide, there is no way of preventing the separation from deepening into an abyss. How can the subject cross the divide to reattach itself to the objectivity ‘out there’ on the other side? Doubt takes over. What if there is no other side? What if it’s all illusion?” (Massumi 2011, 7). If my above attempt has been to critically examine how different forces within a performative presentation, like for example the notion of representation, relate to – and sustain – this divide, the subsequent chapter *The Rhythm of Thinking* is instead concerned with its consequences, and how they can be thought of in terms of ethics.
