>We do not begin with a moral image of man or human freedom; we rely on the examination of syntheses, interactions and the openness of life to a not already-given future. We begin, therefore, with perception: not a subject who perceives, nor an object perceived, but an interaction or event of perception which then creates a relation, territory or machine of two responding terms.

>Claire Colebrook

## The visceral foundation

I picture the theater as a space where things happen. I do not know exactly what, and I do not know how it will be perceived. It is an atmosphere of possibilities. What I know is not actually interesting. The known is a restriction, almost like a burden. It is the movements of the attempts we make to find our way that are beautiful. They come when we are lost. It is then I start to invent. (What am I inventing? Something to hold on to? Relations of sorts?) The event is full of movements and sounds and words and when I am inside I alternately feel and think, think and feel. This swinging makes me feel alive. It makes me sense time, that I am part of its unfolding. The inventing is perpetual. It makes up my inner world, and is steered by the ongoing unfolding of events that surround me. As an artist it feels impossible not to let this momentum be part of the conception. Rather, to actually see it as the driving force.

The inner world of the individual in the audience is an image that is constantly in front of me. The turbulence of that other inner world is also mine. But it is almost always, in my imagination, more unruly than my own. Is that because it generates empathy, or that this image represents possibilities greater than my own? Irrespectively, it is the image of the inner movement of the singular individual that inspires me, and that I envision and “talk” to in my constant thinking about the workings of the performance. It is my interest in this inner movement that makes whatever story, or problem or drama to be presented, seem less important. Rather, it is the freeness of the movement that I am concerned about, its vitality and ultra-sensitivity, a kind of volatile membrane. The dramaturgical thinking is all about imagining how this membrane will and can respond to the different components that make up the composition. The turbulence of the inner world must be sustained. It is not about containing it, but about acknowledging it.

I assume that hidden possibilities can only emerge if we enter into that which is not restricted by thought. All compositional measures are constrained by the limitations of thinking: dramaturgy is, and is not, a science. The limits of my thinking once irritated me, now I see them as a lever. I say: my limits constitute the incentive for experimentation. In the making, there is intuition and play, there is uncertainty and assumption; it is a search for intensities I have not yet experienced. The initiative is then about setting possibilities in motion. Or: All I do is create conditions for something never-before-experienced to happen. Or: Invent possibilities for experiencing the experience of existence; it is not about being in it, inside the multiplicity (which, of course, we always are) but to co-compose.

If the above thoughts are something like a declaration of my esthetics (or: an exposition of the visceral foundation for my artistic practice), the following is, in turn, an explication of how its dramaturgical and compositional transformations correlate to my outlook on the world: How it is moved from an I into a We-context. How it extends the reasoning beyond the structural specifics of the performances, into the concepts of ethics.

Since the occurrence of the components in the compositions are founded on, and shaped by esthetic choices and decisions, an ethico-esthetic aspect is not something that is assigned to the expression but embodied and enclosed by it. It grows from within, it ensues from the nature of the material, from the structure of the creative processes, from the dramaturgical construct, and it finds its potential in the meeting with the audience. To define the correlation in that order grounds the reasoning in the intuitive creative act, *but immediately* as I enter into the work, a shift occurs. The esthetic aspect is then “just” the initial impetus because as soon as the processes are set in motion, as soon as the dramaturgical questions enter into the doings and force us to explain why we are doing what we are doing, the position of the gaze changes. Or rather, is complemented. The perspectives are thus thoroughly meshed and to attempt a demarcation between esthetics and ethics (which in this precise instance should be understood as encapsulating the concepts of value and politics) is a challenge. Why does that challenge have to be met? Why is it necessary to talk about ethics in the framework of an embodied practice? Firstly, because I think it is important to infuse the creative doings with the responsibility that the concept implies; it pulls the doings out of innocence. Secondly, a discussion of ethics implicitly points to the notion of social relations and their importance. And thirdly, because the overarching esthetic principle in the performances is an ethics, emerging from a vision of the subject.

The operational systematization that the reasoning implies (contrary views are probably numerous) is done to enable transformations, but also to illuminate how different compositional measures rest on a broader ethico-esthetic conviction.

## Sustain the turbulence

The expressive force in the performances is not to be found in what they convey, but outside what is explicitly exposed, in the reaction they cause. That observation must be analyzed and expanded on extensively, as it can be applied to a wide array of esthetic expressions. The starting point must be to ask: What *specifically* is meant to occur outside “what is explicitly exposed”? And, what is the nature of the reaction that I am talking about? To meet those questions I want to temporarily replace the term co-composition with the term figuring-out and suggest that what is meant to perceptively occur outside that which is explicitly exposed is an activity, an activity of figuring out, among the audience. But, it is not about figuring out how a story is going to unfold, but a figuring-out of a more, one could say, inventive type.<sup>230</sup>  As the performances that I am referring to consciously, through their dramaturgical construct as well as through the quality of the material, try to escape narration and representation and aim to present something that is never-before-experienced – hence not mirroring occurrences outside the performative situation – the starting point of the figuring-out-process becomes: What is this that I see/hear? From my directorial position, it is not, however, important to supply an answer to that question. What is important is that the figuring-out *actually happens*, as an active engagement in the multiplicities, playing out as co-creation.

In order to delineate the dynamics of the figuring-out-activity – *and* to specify the nature of the reaction/activity – it is helpful to employ the thinking of Berthold Brecht (1898–1956). Doing so offers some distinct perspectives on audience activation, involvement and investment that mirror the type of activity that I am trying to trace (hence placing it in a historical perspective). But Brecht’s thinking also represents important differences in relation to our performances; differences that help to illuminate how I envisioned the audience reaction would play out. When describing his view on the relation between his plays and the audience Brecht says that: “The audience has got to be good enough psychologists to make its own sense of the material I put before it. All I can guarantee is the absolute correctness and authenticity of what happens in my plays; I am prepared to bank on my knowledge of human beings. But I leave the maximum freedom of interpretation. The sense of my plays is immanent. You have to fish it out yourself” (Brecht 2006, 14).<sup>231</sup>  In order to set this fishing-out-activity in motion Brecht sees the need to present the incidents “baldly so that the audience can think for itself.” and by doing so get their “enjoyment from setting its reason to work” (Brecht 2006, 14). Fishing-out, thinking, setting reason to work – are all activities that place the potential of the expression in the hands of its audience. The dramatic text is less concerned with its own inner stability and more with its perceptive outcome, and its presentation should be formed so that the spectator is “given the possibility (and duty) of assembling, experimenting and abstracting” (Brecht 2006, 60).<sup>232</sup>  

It is from this point, that the comparison becomes more interesting, and somewhat charged, as it enters into what the figuring-out-activity is suppose to generate, and hence offers this reasoning a constructive friction. In his extensive prolongations of Brechtian theories, Walter Benjamin defines the plays that Brecht presents to his audience as representations of the conditions and circumstances under which human life is lived (Benjamin 1968). They represent forces and incidents that exist in the world, and in his exposition of these forces Brecht does not reject representation, nor turn his back on narration (I would actually say the opposite, in both cases). Instead, it could be inferred that they are sharply delineated metaphors of social and political conditions existing outside the theater and presented with the aim “to expose the laws of cause and effect” (Brecht 2006, 71). The difference between such a dramaturgical/intentional stance and the one in the performances we are looking at, are twofold. The first concerns the structure of the material; where Brecht offers condensed dramatic situations with a representational esthetic, the material in the performances are of a non-representative, non-metaphorical type. The other significant difference is that while the work of Brecht finds it dramaturgical stability through mono-linear narration, the dramaturgical construct in our performances is instead built on a non-narrative multiplicity. The figuring-out in the Brechtian context includes, in my opinion, the activation of moral judgment, while the figuring-out in the multiplicity of my performances aims to efface moral judgment and encourage the invention of relations. So, even if Brecht claims that he is anxious “to teach the spectator a quite definite practical attitude, directed towards changing the world,” and that such a process “must begin by making him adopt in the theatre a quite different attitude from what he is used to” (Brecht 2006, 57), the alternate gaze that Brecht wants to infuse relates, through the representational esthetics, to phenomenon that exists in the world outside the performance. The fishing-out becomes a rearranging of what is true, as Brecht himself puts it. This truth is a political truth that will ensue from experiencing – and judging – the dialectical forces presented in the play. Such a dialectical dynamic, conjured up by the concept of truth, is not applicable to the performances that I refer to, as they instead confirm the idea of experiential diversity in which the truth is the multiplicity of alternatives.

The most important difference between the Brechtian *fishing-out* and the *figuring-out/inventing* that I am talking about is, however, to be found in a formulation in which Brecht’s dramaturgical thinking touches on a philosophical domain that borders on the idea of immanent perceptive processes (Is he consciously or intuitively picking up formulations akin to process philosophy?) when he says: “At any rate I am not so discouragingly chaotic as people think. I may confine my plays to the raw material, but I show only what is typical. I select; that is where the discipline comes in. Even when a character behaves by contradictions that’s only because nobody can be identically the same at two different moments. Changes in his exterior continually lead to an inner reshuffling. The continuity of the ego is a myth. A man is an atom that perpetually breaks up and forms anew. We have to show things as they are” (Brecht 2006, 15). Even if this observation acknowledges the perpetually forming of the new, it ends on a static note. This is contrary to my view, as nothing in the performances is about how things *are*, but what they can *become*. If the Brechtian exposure of the forces aims at generating an activity of reflection and judgment, resulting in possible solutions, the turbulent multiplicity in our performances is instead there to encourage the avoidance of putting things in one order; a continuous reshuffling of (outer) relations.<sup>233</sup>  

Irrespective of the difference in the qualitative specifics of the expressive material, regardless of the disparity in the sought after outcome, the similarities between the perceptive dynamic that I search for and the audience creative activation that the Brechtian dramaturgical thinking seeks to attain, is clear. This activation is, as Walter Benjamin points out, indicative of the theater as a moral institution as it “not merely transmit knowledge but actually engenders it” (Benjamin 1983, 11). It is well known that Brechtian theories expose the political aspect of dramaturgy, that they pull the question of form into a politico-esthetical discourse. But to disengage the aspect of ethics from the political is not possible. Consequently, the discourse I want to delineate should be understood as nothing other than a politico-ethical-esthetics, hence acknowledgment of the embedded relation and dependency between the aspects. The question that this leads us to, and with which I want to exit the Brechtian reference and return to the performances of our reference, is if the ethical aspect of esthetic expressions is to be found in the treatment of known (recognizable) forces or is it to be found in the not yet experienced, in the invention, in the process of discovering the (still) unknown?

With that question in mind, how can the meaning of the word ethics in the locution “ethics of dramaturgy” be understood? A good way to start tackling that question is with a quote by Claire Colebrook where she, rather conclusively, formulates a Deleuzian onto-ethics: “We do not begin with a moral image of man or human freedom; we rely on the examination of syntheses, interactions and the openness of life to a not already-given future. We begin, therefore, with perception: not a subject who perceives, nor an object perceived, but an interaction or event of perception which then creates a relation, territory or machine of two responding terms” (Colebrook 2002, 143). This is an ethics that is embedded in an experiential process of existence. It is what I have chosen to call an onto-ethics, framed by concepts like syntheses, interaction, empowering modes of becoming, exchange and inventing of relations, and so on. These are all concepts affirmative of what Rosi Braidotti calls a vision of the subject: a human subject coming into – and experiencing – being through relations unfolding through time. It is in this Braidottian extension of the Deleuzian theories, that contact with a dramaturgical thinking becomes almost tangible.<sup>234</sup> I see the *vision of the subject*, as an ethical grounding, harboring two strong, expansive parallel but co-dependent potentialities. The first are the infinite possibilities within the creative resources of the imagination, and the second is the potentiality of all relations that life presents. It is in the nourishing of these potentialities – and their correlation – that an ethics occur.

By placing this outlook within composition I will suggest its correlation to and consequences for the dramaturgical structure. However, this correlation is not a mirroring type. The dramaturgical structure cannot, in itself, be seen as ethical but instead it is constitutive of those circumstances under which the individual being can (possibly) have an experience of an ethical kind. The performance(s) is thus thought of as an environment that presents *possibilities* for (life-)movements that affirm a vision of the subject. In other words, nothing in the following is about what is actually going on, what the actual experience is like. Rather, it is an idea of how the perception of the individual subject *might* move when the circumstances are such and such.  This claim of a reciprocal relation between a vision of the subject and the esthetics of the performances is probably the most expansive, and yet delicate extension of the compositional thinking that I am trying to trace. But even so, the claim is of little interest if it is not placed within the concept of composition, or rather within the *problematization* of dramaturgy and composition. In other words, placed outside language. It follows, that even if the main critical discourse throughout this work is built around the concept of immanence – in collective creation and in the performance/audience exchange – we need to talk about this aspect as the *ethics of dramaturgy and composition*, and not primarily as the ethics of immanence.<sup>235</sup>    

However, even if the aspect of ethics – in whatever way it is delineated – reaches down to levels of existence and thinking that the performances can only touch upon, it can still be used to outline the conditions that govern the shared experience of the performance, hence influence all its different parameters. The movement, or the onto-ethical process, that the outlook proposes, is what the performances want to trigger, what they want to encourage, what they want to support, through their structural specifics. So, let me place this in relation to one of the performances.

## An open beginning

When I formulated the creative circumstances for the performance of John and the Mushrooms, I nourished three parallel levels of expressive forces in order to generate the turbulence, from which the activity of inventing (which by now should be understood as the creative extension of the figuring-out-activity), could emerge:

When the audience invests their attention in the expression of the performance, the performance comes/can come into being.

By making the actual structuring of the performance apprehensible, it becomes possible to experience and understand that something is coming into being.

When encountering the never-before-experienced, a shift can happen and a new understanding can occur.

The first level underscores the ambition to create a structure that equally encourages and demands co-creation and invention, beyond interpretation. The second level illuminates the theater as fictional, a place where a “world” is built. In other words, what is being built – the performance – is a construction that can be rebuilt in a different way which, when transferred into the outside world, encourages one to question the world as “it is what it is.” The third level is about the potential within encountering something unrecognizable. All three levels indicate a demand (or duty, to use Brecht’s wording) for an active inventive audience. However, it is the third level that is most clearly attached to the question of how ethics relate to the nature of the esthetic experience.

The viability in claiming that there is an ethical aspect to be found in an esthetic experience of something never-before-experienced, has to rest on the idea that an open definition of the individual subject is intrinsic to the concept of never-before-experienced, as revealed in the Deleuzian onto-ethical outlook quoted above. This openness describes a subject who is in a process of constant becoming. It is a mode that affirms the (unrestrained/infinite) possibilities of life, and – which was a determining factor for the esthetic choices in the performances – ascertains that those possibilities can only emerge in an environment where relations are conceived as perpetually created anew, outside of/separate from social, cultural and esthetic norms. To *not* begin with a set image of morality or of human freedom, nor with “a subject who perceives, nor an object perceived, but an interaction or event of perception which then creates a relation” means, through formal transformations, shifting the focus of the theater away from being a producer of monadic esthetics, messages or ideas, towards what I earlier have talked about as the Meeting. This meeting then, because of its immanent unfolding, has to “rely on the examination of syntheses, interactions and the openness of life to a not already-given future” (Colebrook 2002, 143).

The transference of such an outlook compositional thinking could mean to see, measure and value what is created both in light of how the expressional form engages the creative resources of the individual subject. as well as which relations it sustains. In a performative situation this means that all relations - social relations as well as expressive ones - should be given the opportunity to appear as new (never-before-experienced), thus acknowledging the subject’s potential to invent and expand in whatever direction she/he desires. So, when I speak of ethics in this context – the performative-ethical momentum – I refer to an exchange, and to how the nature and constitution of that exchange reflects a vision of the subject. What the performances are trying to create is, in its own limited sense, an ethics defined as a practice that cultivates affirmative modes of active forces and relation (Bradotti 2011). This ethical pragmatism rejects the idea that the object of ethical inquiry is a subjective individualistic core that represents a moral intention or rational consciousness, but instead assigns it to the effects each individual’s actions have upon others in the world. When Braidotti conceptually links this to “the notion of embodied materialism and to a non-unitary vision of the subject.” it correlates to the nature of the performances/meetings because of their non-metaphorical and polyphonic construct. The specificity of that correlation is, firstly, that the dramaturgical aim is to create/establish a materiality in the performance(s) that is its “own”, independent of outside references. And secondly, a non-unitary vision of the subject is affirmed by the multiplicity of expressive trajectories in which not one single story (or idea, or message) is purported. In such a perceptive environment the ethical discourse is a “discourse about forces, desires, and values that act as empowering modes of becoming” as opposed to morality, which “is the implementation of established protocols and sets of rules” (Bradotti 2011, 300).

When the process oriented and relation affirmative onto-ethics of the Colebrook/ Deleuzian outlook – and its Braidottian extension – is activated in compositional thinking, the notion of ethics is inevitably linked to a critique of representational esthetics. That is to say that, to search for the ethical aspect in dramaturgical structures, outside language, beyond ideas and messages, and to shift the theatrical experience towards an experience of a Meeting, a representational coding needs to be challenged. It installs the polarity of an object perceived by a subject and it sets off sequences of thinking that find their bearing – and values – in phenomena existing outside the event. In such a perceptive dynamic the figuring-out-activity loses the quality of invention.

I want to suggest here, that the ethics of dramaturgy is about the movement of perceptive processes; their openness, their affirmative potential, their liveliness and demands. Consequently, the precondition for a sustainable performative-ethics is that everything that stymies this movement should be eliminated.

## The rhythm of thinking (and the authority of narratives)

So, what are those perceptive movements? What does it really mean, to talk about their openness, affirmative potential, vitality and demands? Movements of what? And how are they actually experienced? I have talked about them as a process of figuring-out/inventing but what is the actual activity in these movements? And, what is the relationship between this activity and an ethics? Do not all (esthetic) expressions produce affect, and if ethics is the science of affect is not there an ethics attached to all expressions? (O’Sullivan 2006).<sup>236</sup>  How can the claim that there is a correlation between ethics and a non-representative esthetics then be understood? Is it the specific nature of the affect that a non-representative esthetics generates that determines this claim, and hence needs to be looked at? I want to approach these questions by examining them through the experience of co-composition and becoming – and, through what these experiences entail and affirm.<sup>237</sup>  

When Brian Massumi asserts that the “co-composing of formative forces constitutes in each exercise of experience a novel *power of existence*: a power to become” (Massumi 2011 12), we not only sense the ethical vibrations but also that co-composition and becoming are closely intertwined. Placed within the perceptive situation of the performances, I want to suggest that this entwining, in an intricate way, is related to the activity of thinking. Or rather: for them to occur in (be an outcome of) the perceptive moment, thinking is a vital part – the indispensable inner movement – of experiencing them. Thinking should therefore, in this context, be understood as the activity going on in the individual – as the contribution of the brain – when experiencing the artistic expression. This is not to say that thinking is the movement, but that it is one experiential component in co-composition and becoming. Brian Massumi and Erin Manning capture this dynamic when saying that “the activity of neurons enters the event on an equal footing with other ingredients: from the angle of neurons’ ability to co-compose relational fields. Alone, they are nothing. Together with other ingredients, which are of every conceivable determinable nature, the neurons vie to have their ‘voice’ heard most loudly in the way in which the event moves toward expression (Massumi, Manning 2014, 21).<sup>238</sup> Those “other ingredients” should be understood as sensuous experiences, experiences not processed through the activity of thinking. A kindred and enhancing image of the movement of thinking is offered by Deleuze (and Guattari), when they talk about the sensuous contraction happening through contemplation: “Sensation is pure contemplation, for it is through contemplation that one contracts, contemplating oneself to the extent that one contemplates the elements from which one originates. Contemplating is creating, the mystery of passive creation, sensation. Sensation fills out the plane of composition and is filled with itself by filling itself with what it contemplates: it is ‘enjoyment’ and ‘self-enjoyment’. It is a subject, or rather an inject … These are not Ideas that we contemplate through concepts but the elements of matter that we contemplate through sensation” (Deleuze and Guattari 1994, 212). However, it is not possible to simply assign the sensuous to one type of ingredient (understood as what I earlier talked about as the ‘material’, the ‘components’, or ‘expressive matter’) and the non-sensuous to another. Sharp delineations like this cannot be made, especially not when looking at a performative situation. Even if the different “ingredients”, on a purely structural level, can be assumed to set off an experience that tends either towards a non-sensuous or a sensuous – like for example semantic language as non-sensuous and music as sensuous – the experiential effect cannot be deduced as such, since it is dependent on the compositional and performative handling of the material, as well as on its level of representation. The creative – co-compositional – impact of thinking is thus contingent on the rejection of the idea that the sensual experience excludes thinking. Instead, thinking is part of sensing – and – there is an oscillating movement between the two, a movement Brian Massumi describes as a thinking-feeling process (Massumi 2011). This oscillating movement is like a swirling intersection where the activity of co-composition and the experience of becoming meet. Hence, it is implicitly connected to the question of ethics, which is why it is a dramaturgical/compositional concern, to explore its workings and sustain its vitality.

Tracing thinking in co-composition, making assumptions on how it moves and what it entails, can take off from the notion that there are things that do not disturb thought and then there are things that force us to think (Deleuze 1968). The first category encompasses recognizable things, and even if thought is somewhat employed in that perceptive activity it has, following Deleuze, nothing to do with thinking. They set off an activity in which thought is just “filled with no more than an image of itself, one in which it recognizes itself the more it recognizes things: this is a finger, this is a table” (Deleuze 1968, 138). Is it then, only when we have difficulty in recognizing something that we truly think? When Deleuze says that something “in the world forces us to think. This something is an object not of recognition but of a fundamental encounter” (Deleuze 1968, 139). It is not connected to or dependent on an esthetic experience. Nevertheless, it is related to the sensuous; the primary characteristic of an encounter “is that it can only be sensed” (Deleuze 1968, 139). This captures the notion of thinking and feeling as inseparable, the nonsensuous and the sensuous as intertwined, and it reinforces the dramaturgical importance of understanding perception as the sensation of intensities.<sup>239</sup>

In the context of co-composition the question of recognition is, and is not, a concern. The concern is the movement of thinking as co-creation, and the production of the never-before-experienced. In the performances the attempt to escape recognition – a representational coding – happens through time and through polyphonic processes. The different components carry a kind of mix of representational and non-representational coding. In *John and the Mushrooms* for example, some of the music by Cage includes rhythmical formations that are representational though combined with sound structures that I would describe as non-representational. Semantic language is used but superimposed. Also, there is the unavoidable recognition/representation of human bodies, which is met by placing them in relations-of-nonrelation through the multiplicity of expressive trajectories. All this affirms confusion as an important expressive mode, generating a semiotic ambiguity that causes the thinking – in the perceiving subject – to move in unpredictable ways: Components are recognized, but their relations are not. The investment - the creative additions that the audience makes in the perceptive moment, how the individual concludes, extends, creates meaning of the perceived in a non-narrative expression - is the activity of co-creation. Thinking is then the co-composing of relations between the different intensities, an experience possibly sensed as becoming “as an extreme contiguity within a coupling of two sensations without resemblance or, on the contrary, in the distance of a light that captures both of them in a singular reflection” (Deleuze and Guattari 1994, 173).

The dramaturgical/perceptive suggestion is then that the experience of the co-compositional activity (thinking–inventing) is what causes the experience of becoming. Does that indicate that co-composing entails thinking and becoming does not? That the becoming is an outcome, a kind of post-thinking state, and that the notion of becoming is affirmative of being, but not of thinking? A problematizing approach to these questions, in the context of the performances, is that this movement – where thinking and feeling perpetually exchange positions – finds its dramaturgical validity in a situation that sees becoming as a process in which the experience is self-explanatory “in the way it complexly plays out, composing a self-expressive outcome for itself” (Massumi, Manning 2014, 22).  A way of to understand this is that the experience of co-composition resonates becoming, but that the actual experience of becoming can only emerge (be sensed) if recognized, as co-created: *simultaneously created, experienced and recognized*. (Experiencing the experience of becoming is immanent in the thinking-feeling process: it affirms its own movement.)<sup>240</sup> Embedded in such an outlook is the notion that the recognition is sensed as a discovery that in turn generates the desire for another (discovery):  “When the process continues, it is because it has succeeded in affirming its own operations through an immanent, qualitative, self-modulating evaluation” (Massumi, Manning 2014, 126).<sup>241</sup> The dramaturgical-ethical aspect is then to be found in the idea that the compositional measures should sustain – and enhance – the vitality of this movement.

A prerequisite for the idea of co-composing is that the term/concept relation-of-nonrelation should be given a central role in the dramaturgical construct. A closer look at this concept, through the thinking of Brian Massumi, enables an understanding of how co-composition and becoming can relate to a vision of the subject, an ethics, as formulated above.<sup>242</sup>  As mentioned in the text *It is All in the Passing*, this rem finds its bearing in a view that all elements contributing to an occurrence are in themselves disparate. The term might lead us to believe that moments of experience cannot be experienced as they connect to each other, that “they may be said to ‘come together’ only in the sense of being mutually enveloped in a more encompassing event of change-taking-place that expresses their differentials in the dynamic form of its own extra-being” (Massumi 2011, 21). However, relation-of-nonrelation is paradoxical in so far as it both aims at capturing the discrete occurrence of elements and their perceptive coming together. The phrase is thus used as “a way of holding together, in the concept of the event, the differential status of its conditioning elements and the dynamic unity of their sheer occurrence as a little absolute” (Massumi 2011, 20). The connotation of co-composition in the workings of relation-of-nonrelation appears when Massumi makes the observation that the relation between different experiences plays out and is “purely effective: on the creative level of effect.”  This is then, just as in the multiplicity/independency of expressive trajectories in the performances, the simultaneous acknowledgement of the non-connective discreteness of elements and of the potentiality in their confluence. Following Alfred North Whitehead, Brian Massumi asserts that the relation-of-nonrelation is a necessary condition for creativity, and that it is what makes space (“elbowroom”) in the world for an experience to come absolutely into its own production of novelty, “uncramped by the constraint of connectively fitting in” (Massumi 2011, 21).<sup>243</sup> Here we start moving closer to ethics. To activate a relation-of-nonrelation outlook on the non-narrative, on the ‘incomplete’ multiplicity of the performances, is to create a space for the individual subject to form, through co-composing, her/his own story, or meaning, or whatever we want to call it. The non-narrativity of the multiplicity opens up, through a relation-of-nonrelation outlook, for the individual to have a say in what is being expressed, implicitly giving “you” a voice: “you” are not spoken to, but invited to invent.  In a narrative, your voice is borrowed or stolen by the progression of the inbuilt causality. It installs the illusion of a transcendent factor, it tranquilizes “the sluggishness of our brain, by the ready made facilitating paths [*frayage*] of dominant opinions, and by our not being able to tolerate infinite movements or master the infinite speeds that crush us (so that we have to stop the movement and make ourselves prisoners of the relative horizon once more)?” (Deleuze, Guattari 1994, 49). In the multiplicity of expressions, on the other hand, the voice is disorganized, divided, and has to be assembled.  This affirms a vision of the subject as co-creative, co-composing, sensing-thinking, inventing; a subject that senses becoming through co-composing relations, unfolding through time.

The perceptive sequence of figuring-out that happens in an expressive environment dominated by a non-representative, non-narrative esthetics immediately enhances the experience of the specifics of the situation. It places it in a now, redundant of any history or imaginable future. Such a dynamic effaces the notion of a fixed being, and instead inserts a motion of becoming, thus mirroring the Deleuze/Guattari assertion that: “We are not in the world, we become with the world; we become by contemplating it” (Deleuze and Guattari 1994, 169). If this assertion by Deleuze and Guattari is fully embraced, the time spent with the performance obviously cannot be seen as something removed from this ontological outlook, like a petrification of the movement of contemplation. Life is an ongoing becoming and when we are in the theater this becoming has the potential of taking on a strikingly different nature, creating sensations and relations of a kind other than usual. Directing then is to form the circumstances under which this becoming transpires.

## The vision embodied – Univocity

What does it mean to think about directing as “the forming of the circumstances”? What encapsulates “the circumstances”? How can the specific quality of the circumstances be thought of as mirroring, supporting a vision of the subject?

Well, the circumstances should be understood as the specifics of everything that makes up the performance: the constitution of the space, movements of (all) bodies, the handling of text, of sound/sound structures, of dynamics, of articulation, and all relations, expressive as well as social, between the performed and the audience, and between the members of the audience. To think of the performance as a compound of circumstances is to set the stage for possibilities. To approach the totality of these circumstances with an ethics in mind, can be thought of as an embodied vision of the subject. It is then not about an ethics that operates on semantic or semiotic levels, but on all levels of expressive intensities: cultivating affirmative modes of relation, active forces and values (Braidotti 2011). The idea of directing as the “forming of the circumstances” is a submission to the totality of the components. If the reasoning around the experience of turbulence and around the activity of thinking, of co-composing and becoming, can be said to somehow happen within the singular subject, it should also be noted that it emerges within this totality, within the whole, and not in isolation. Therefore I suggest that a commitment to “the forming of the circumstance” is also a commitment to the notion of univocity.

The insertion of this concept is done as a means to trace an embodied vision of the subject through the extensions inherent in the experience of the multitude. The insertion of this concept is done in order to trace an embodied vision of the subject through the virtual extensions inherent in the experience of the multitude. Just like it sounds, it is to embark on a flight into turbulent forces that tip the dramaturgical thinking away from the idea of being about fixed energies (inherent in the specifics of the expressive material) into an experimental exploration of the perceptive situation as a construct mirroring, or intensifying the univocal being in the world. Following Rosi Braidotti, it is an attempt to firmly locate affirmation “in the exteriority, the cruel, messy outsideness of Life itself. Creative chaos is not chaotic – it is the virtual formation of possible forms. Life is not an a priori that gets individuated in single instances, but it is immanent to and thus coincides with its multiple material actualizations. It is the site of birth and emergence of the new – life itself” (Braidotti 2011, 305–6). The organization of the performance (and the performative and perceptive activities going on within) is, and is not, a part of this “cruel, messy outsideness” which is why the idea of thinking of the performance structure as a diversity existing on a univocal plane of being includes a large number of contradictions (tension between the philosophical concept – what it stands for – *and* the concrete performative outcome of the expressed). The use of the concept univocity thus becomes an experiment, an opportunity at best, to further the ethico-esthetic discussion.

Univocity, closely entwined with immanence, means in the Deleuzian discourse that “there is only one kind of thing or being in reality, and as such no fundamental separation or hierarchy between the nature of words and things, body and mind, subject and object, representation and the real, theory and practice” (Cull 2012, 7). To think of being as univocal is then the removal of a transcendent force, which precludes us from “separating some distinct being as a center or foundation; all beings are located on a single plane (pluralism)” (Colebrook 2002, 32). However, a univocal being is the being of difference, of multitude and not the idea of One (transcendent) being. Univocity, like immanence, “is just this commitment to staying at the level of difference, refusing any external explanation of difference” (Colebrook 2002, 32). In the world – and in the performances – the notion of a univocal being equals ontological instability and this instability is the circumstance in which the individual subject has to navigate with the help of all elements, creating/inventing/co-composing relations.<sup>244</sup> The transference of the ontological dynamic that is tied to the notion of a univocal plane of being, into the realm of art and perception is, and is not, elusive. As a vital and unruly outlook on life, it is something of a contradiction to compress the notion of a univocity into any kind of formal restriction. In other words, to esthetically/compositionally apply the notion of a univocal plane of being is to adhere the compositional measures to an outlook on living things characterized by difference and the autonomous “power to differentiate itself or differ from itself in an infinite number of ways” (Cull 2012, 8). It means submitting to a “logic” in which the subject itself (humans, and expressive matter alike) is embedded in an immanent process, and everything, every event, consolidates on its own terms and in its own time.  This immanent “logic” is contrary to a traditional view of composition in which material is organized, and brought to consolidation according to internal, autonomous premises.<sup>245</sup> This observation, that highlights the contradiction inherent in the idea of composing processes that evade control, could be said to be the impetus behind the use of the term, “the forming of the circumstance.”

But even so, my esthetic attempt to create a performative reciprocity between the “quality” in a univocal outlook and a vision of the subject does not submit to the forces implied by Rosi Braidotti above: it is a question of formal decision, with its own logic. A logic however, that aims at allowing the excess, that a univocal outlook illuminates, to be the foundational condition, the milieu, in which the expressive matter moves. This logic then offers a conceptual grounding for the multiplicities of expressional trajectories and also a point of contact with the unstable world and the turbulence in which the perceiving subject leads its life. Simon O’Sullivan remarks, following Jean-François Loytard, that the affirmation of excess is what “constitutes art’s effectivity over and beyond its existence as a cultural object” (O’Sullivan 2006, 40). And this excess need not be theorized as transcendent, “but that we can think the esthetic power of art in very much an immanent sense, as offering an excess not somehow beyond the world but an excess of the world, the world here understood as the sum total of potentialities of which our typical experience is merely an extraction” (O’Sullivan 2006, 40). The attempt to create a conceptual transference of univocal being is thought of as an affirmation of the potentialities inherent in the experience of the “excess of the world.” This is why I see the performative conceptualizations as an embodied vision of the subject.

What is then the actual ethical momentum to be found in the “quality” of a univocal outlook (and its extensions into ontological instability, and excess) when applied as a foundation for forming the circumstances? More precisely, in what way does it encapsulate a vision of the subject? Firstly, it captures the esthetico-ethical attempt to illuminate the non-contradiction in difference. Or: it is affirmative of, a commitment to, a multitude of different singular instances – and experiences (subjects) – present on a univocal plane. Secondly, the ontological instability is confirmative of a dramaturgical structure (multiple trajectories moving through time with no coherent meaning) that effaces a dialectical type of narration, hence evading a moral stance. What is there has to be invented anew, resting only on what there is. Embracing the multiple differences of a univocal being thus encourages inventions that are, at best, dislocated from any outside judgement. It is ethics precisely because there is no morality. With no transcendent influence but just one univocal plane of difference, “the ethics and politics cannot adopt some separate position of judgement. The task of thinking and ethics will be one of *amor fati* (love of what is): not judging what is, but rather living up to the differences of life” (Colebrook 2002, 35). And lastly, one could say that a univocal being confirms the ambiguity of the performative expression as an opening to a multiplicity that “has neither subject nor object, only determinations, magnitudes, and dimensions,” thus not dividing the world into perceivers and perceived (Deleuze and Guattari 1987, 9).

## Forces and Togetherness

When John Cage came out from a concert having heard Handel’s *Messiah* he was asked by a friend if he did not just love the ‘Hallelujah Chorus’ and he answered that “No, I can’t stand it.” The friend then asked if he didn’t liked to be moved, and Cage responded by saying that, “I don’t mind being moved, but I don’t like to be pushed” (Kostelanetz 1987, 234). This anecdote highlights how the workings of compositional specifics can relate to the question of “elbowroom”; it exemplifies an experience where there is no room to expand and take off into co-composition; it captures the dynamic of an experience enclosed in a compositional format that proceeds without handing over any “responsibility for the authorship of the performance” to the perceiving subject (Cull 2012, 219). In its own very concise way, this story can therefore serve as a reference for approaching two questions that reverberate underneath the notion of both co-composition and a univocal plane of being. Questions that I see as unavoidable if one wants to look further into the ethico-esthetic aspects of a jointly experienced theater performance: How do the precise qualitative specifics of the expressive material allow – or stymie – those experiential movements that are affirmative of a vision of the subject? And, how does the unique individual experience of the performance relate to the inescapable togetherness of the event?

What Cage felt when listening to Handel could possibly be described as *ressentiment*. The music demanded that he was obedient to its force, and this was probably what caused his reaction. He could not be active, only reactive. The solid force of Handel, a force that was solidified independently of his presence and, so to speak, did not make use of his own capacity. Laura Cull, in her last chapter of *Theatres of Immanence*, takes us through a complex Deleuzian/Nietzschean thought figure that attaches an ethics of immanence and the question of value to the experience of forces, obedience and ressentiment. It is a reasoning that takes off from Deleuze’s work on Nietzsche – *The Genealogy of Morals* – in which he suggests that, “differing systems of value are the products of distinct modes of life, particularly the difference between the way of being that he [Nietzsche] assigns to ‘the noble’ (or master) and ‘the slave’ ” (Cull 2012, 213). The definition of a slave morality, as recounted by Deleuze, is a system of values “derived from reaction and negation, rather than affirmation, as built on the principle of *ressentiment* or ‘imaginary revenge’ ” (Cull 2012, 214). This morality is a reactive force that reacts to chance occurrences as unwanted deviations “from expectations or predetermined ideas”. In other words, it resents the instability of an immanent unfolding of (creative) events (Cull 2012, 214). It might seem harsh, from a language point of view, to equate the perceptive situation that Cage experienced with one of a slave, but it illuminates that it is “reaction rather than action that dominates the production of values in slave morality” (Cull 2012, 214).<sup>246</sup> In Cull’s continued explication of the Deleuzian/ Nietzschean discourse, the active and the reactive are explained as qualities of forces, forces that should be understood as dominant and dominated, respectively. The quality of these forces – translated by Deleuze into the concepts of obedience and command – are linked; they are present in and comprise “a body.” If the theater is seen as this “body,” Cull suggests that it constitutes “the ideal poles between which theatres of immanence operate” (Cull 2012, 214). It is the handling of these forces then, that could be understood as the challenge when making performances that are contingent on immanent (creative) movements. But how can we evaluate and understand, more concretely, the relationship between obedience/command and the structure of the artistic expression? What counts as obedience and command in the context of a perceptive situation and how do we measure the amount of active and reactive force in a given body? Cull says, we “will not find large qualities of obedience and *ressentiment* where we expect them to be in theatre, or anywhere else; hence the need to go as far as possible to address the singularity of specific performance practices, rather than trying to generate some kind of blueprint for all immanent theatres to come” (Cull 2012, 215). This is a very important comment. Not only because it points out that the concepts of obedience and command cannot be seen as having fixed dynamics, but also because it emphasizes the importance of looking more closely at the specifics of the artistic practice, which in my opinion, entails analyzing the energies inherent in the different expressive matters; to go *down to what is below the dramaturgical level*. Esthetics and ethics coincide not just because the ethico-esthetic force operates on all levels of expressive intensities (not only on semantic, or semiotic levels) but because of the specific nature of the expressive material. Which means, in the context of performativity, that it is about the exact structure of the material *and* the specifics of its deliverance (shaping). If we refrain from analyzing and discussing these aspects the thinking around a reciprocal relationship between esthetics and ethics will stay on the surface, and never move down to the dynamics of perceptive effect. We cannot, however, be so simplistic as to say that obedience to the forces of a composition is only enforced when certain formal phenomena like narration, or traditional harmonic cadenzas, or even metric patterns, i.e. a representational coding, are in play. No, of course, any compositional structure pushes the perceiver in different directions. So how then do we approach the important question of whether theatres that tend towards immanence have a higher value  - are better - than theaters that do not (Cull 2012)? And if that is the case, what are those values and how can they be described? Can theater performances that lack the possibility of an immanent process in the exchange between the performance and its audience, automatically be given one value, and those performances that encourage it, be given another? Should performances with a multilayered structure, building on superimpositions, be more highly valued, just because of that? These questions have to be met firstly, by a look at how the forces operate, and how and if they allow for co-composition, which actually makes the question of whether theater of immanence has a higher value than other kinds of theater, somewhat obsolete. Instead, the question of value equates the value of the composition in regards to what it can generate. As I have already asserted that there is a vision of the subject – an ethics – to be found in the potentiality of co-composing, hence the question of ethics reverberates by itself, underneath, and can therefore be left alone. So, just as we earlier had to exchange the notion of an ethics of immanence with the notion of an ethics of dramaturgy, we can now rephrase the question: Instead of asking if theaters that tend towards immanence have a higher value, if they are “good,” we should ask how the compositional structure of a performance can allow for experiential movements that affirm a vision of the subject.

One way to analyze the forces at play would be to ask what the qualities of non-narration and superimpositions *do not* offer. What is missing? What can be considered subtracted?<sup>247</sup> Well, the dramaturgical structure does not provide a story.<sup>248</sup> There are no predetermined relations between the performers, there is no fixed relation between performance and audience, no explicit meaning, no fixed positions. Not One voice, no predetermined course of action, no dramatic dialectics, or lone focus, no single rhythm. The “deficiency” that these subtractions cause can be thought of as a release, not a negative. The subtraction of these elements cannot even be said to be “a negative operation because it already enlists and releases positive processes” (Murray 1997, 245). However, as some of the subtractions happen through superimpositions (“stories” are not absent but multiplied, rhythms are not missing but superimposed), certain forces are sustained but take on a different status, spread out, diluted, and as such they enable the occurrence of continuous variation. The “incompleteness” that the subtractions produce enables – commands – action, and does not cause reaction, in an obedient sense. An action is released, to use Deleuzian wording, and this action is the activity of co-creation, co-composing.

A self contained compositional structure, brought to consolidation according to internal, autonomous premises – what we might call monolithic – divides the perceptive alternatives distinctly into two; either you obey and move along with the composed progression, or you are left out. It is a binary situation. My assumption then is that the reaction Cage had to the music of Handel was caused by the monolithic structure of the composition. But also from being “pushed” along the same path as everybody else listening to the concert.<sup>249</sup> This brings us to the question of how the individual audience member relates to and experiences the communality of the performance when the dramaturgical structure is devoid of a mono-linear force, when there is no “story” to be shared? Does this absence separate the individual’s partaking in the performance or does it form a communality of difference? Is there a sense of contradiction between the sharedness of the situation and the impossibility of a common understanding? Is the willingness to trust the individually co-composed experience increased or decreased by the communality of the event? And, what is the ethical aspect of an experiential situation in which the communality on one plane is obvious and concrete and on another plane illusive? Initially, these questions entail a further problematization of the aspect of individuality in the activity of co-composition, because traces of such an activity can also be found in experiences of mono-linear structures. Any viewing, any experience involves that the spectator acts in a contemplating sense, she “composes her own poem with the elements of the poem before her. She participates in the performance by refashioning it in her own way – by drawing back, for example, from the vital energy that it is supposed to transmit in order to make it a pure image and associate this image with a story which she had read or dreamt, experienced or invented” (Rancière 2009, 13). This observation could at a first glance be descriptive of co-composition, in the way I have talked about it. But it is not. There is no invention, or co-creation of relations between the different materialities in the performance. It is not the assembling of dispersed material. Instead it describes an association process of how an impression sets off a memory, or something previously experienced that emanates from a voice other than her own. Jacques Rancière suggests that the communality in this experience, if happening at the theater, is that even if the spectator perceives the expression in her own way, and makes it into a “unique intellectual adventure” she is “similar to all the rest in as much as this adventure is not like any other. This shared power of the equality of intelligence links individuals, makes them exchange their intellectual adventures, in so far as it keeps them separate from one another, equally capable of using the power everyone has to plot her own path” (Rancière 2009, 16–17). There is no reason to argue against this. The claim that all experiences are individually unique intellectual adventures is obvious, and everybody at the Handel concert that Cage attended, would surely adhere to this idea. So the reasoning has to be extended beyond the notion that the shared experience, in and of itself, is indicating some kind of community, even if it is acknowledged as consisting of the dual regimes of conjunction (the shared space, the shared presence) and disjunction (each individual plotting their own path). It has to problematize what a “unique intellectual adventure” can mean, and what sort of “links” can occur when these singularities are not embedded in the same “sense data: forms, words, spaces, rhythms and so on” (Rancière 2009, 57). Such a problematization has to start from the understanding that even if each individual experience is a unique intellectual adventure, and even if there is a communal potential in the (possible) awareness that this experience is similar among all the individuals, *the nature of this intellectual adventure and the constitution of the communality it produces, is fully dependent on the structure of the composition, i.e how the different components (“forms, words, spaces, rhythms”) of the composition relate and what kind of activity it sets off*. Both these aspects – the nature of the intellectual adventure and the constitution of the communality – are related to the figuring-out-activity, and hence to the aspect of ethics.

A perceptive experience, such as the one Rancière’s description implies, is not an experience of being involved in the materiality of the expression. It indicates, as said, an experience of creating associative extension in which the intellectual adventure, the individual path is found by “drawing back”, not carved out by co-composition. This is probably the most common idea of the relationship between an artistic expression and the perceptive mind and it is firmly attached to a mono-linear structure as well as to a representational coding. The impact of such compositional structures can thus possibly be experienced both as a resource (as in the case of Cage’s friend) and as a constraint (as it was for Cage): on the one hand, a possibility to move along with the others, *or* causing a feeling of submission as it separates the individual from his/her own capacities and powers (Jun and Smith 2011). In other words, to infuse a figuring-out-activity the structure of the expression should not be concerned with its own consolidation but with difference and multitude. If that is done the audience is – and is not – embedded in the same sense data: what occurs is perceptively accessible but since the structure is dominated by relations-of-non-relations, like in the performances we are looking at, the causality of the unfolding and the assigning of relations becomes an outcome of co-composition. To formulate a sharp delineation between a process of association and a process of figuring-out is only relevant as a means to problematize the forces that are set in motion by the structure of the composition. The two processes should most constructively be seen as communicating and somewhat shifting.<sup>250</sup>  

The question of communality and how it plays out, becomes radically more vibrant in a diversified and multi-linear expression. It is even possible to say that the concept does not infuse an interesting – and for this investigation useful – dynamic until it is connected to such a perceptive situation. The assumption behind that assertion is that the experience of a mono-linear structure is diversified only so far as it holds the possibility of understanding that what the other(s) understood/felt is different from my own. It is not a structure that affirms multiple ways of inventing, but one that takes on the function of one single reference, functioning as an interlocker of sorts. The conjunctions manifested through the sharing of time and space, is thus affirmed by the compositional structure. It can be argued that any performance placed within pre-formatted circumstances is, in itself, regardless of the compositional structure, a transcendent force, hence setting the boundaries for the experience of communality. This is correct, and it is an observation that should be seen as the unavoidable reference for a multilayered, relation-of-nonrelation esthetics.  Contrary to a mono-linear structure, such an esthetics elaborates on the idea that the instability of the compositional structure is, in that respect, a counter force. It is an enhancement of the contradiction between the sharedness of the situation and the impossibility of a common understanding. The communality does not then evolve around one commonly experienced reference, but it is further diversified and affirmative of a communality of difference. If the compositional structure is concerned with opening up, in an affirmative mode, to a vision of the subject as a “radically, intensive body, that is, an assemblage of forces or flows, intensities, and passions that solidify in space and consolidate in time within the singular configuration commonly known as an ‘individual’ self” (Braidotti 2011, 303), then such forces as Handel represents should probably be left out, subtracted or diluted, as it is a structure that neither demands a figuring-out-activity or enhances the experience of difference.

Just as relevant to this question, as the specific quality of the expressive matter, is the design of the performance space and the spatial relations. Neither the performance of *John and the Mushrooms*, or *Ryoanji – A Meeting* are performed in a proscenium situation. Instead the audience is dispersed in the room, more or less along the walls. Even if such an arrangement might produce a sense of a lack of focus and concentration, there is a sensory fabric that ties the audience together. What is common is sensation. It would be wrong not to acknowledge this. However, the individual process of co-composing could be experienced as contradictory to the enhanced experience of togetherness that comes from a space designed so that the audience members face each other, from across the room. The co-composing has a character of contemplation going on in isolation, and there are few signs of a relation between percepts and affect, and few signs of unison reactions. The concreteness of the others being in the space and the elusiveness of the expression thus becomes a staged “conflict between two regimes of sense” (Rancière 2009, 58). What is shared (except what is being embraced by sensation) is maybe a sense of confusion, of wondering or disengagement. Maybe the sense of being in isolation creates a feeling of loneliness and a decreased willingness to trust the individually co-composed experience? Laura Cull worries that a theater of immanence could become too chaotic, “for many of us,” and that it “must find the right mixture of stratification and destratification, order and chaos” (Cull 2012, 225).  This comment is, on the one hand, rather problematic as the experience is so personal and art would not get anywhere if thinking about what “the many”(whatever constitutes this grouping) can take in or not, or what “they” think is “the right mixture.” On the other hand, it can be seen as being about togetherness and ethics, in so far as it implies that if the expressive forces of the composition are too concerned with themselves, and not with creating possibilities for contact and relations, they might be sensed as rejective and non-affirmative of difference.<sup>251</sup> This points clearly to the importance of understanding what exactly is at stake in the disjunction that a differentiated experience (of being apart) carries, hence what lies behind the directorial measure to create the potential, through the spatial arrangements, for sensing and possibly relating to the other audience members. And it is also the reason for my directorial instruction to the performers to, in different ways, seek contact with the audience. Such measures are in no way unique in a contemporary theater context. But, in a performative situation with multiple and elusive focuses, they establish a level of concrete human relations and as such function as an grid, a type of diversified communality to counteract the lack of confirmation and reinforcement of the individual experience that commonly shared, unison reactions can offer.   

There is an inbuilt vulnerability in a diversified perceptive situation, but that should not be misconstrued and taken for indistinctness or weakness. The apparent fragility of the immanent process is instead a dispersing of normative signs of communality. What I have tried to outline in respect to this aspect is that there is an ethics, a vision of the subject, to be found when trusting that each “individual self” is an intensive and dynamic entity within “a portion of forces that is stable enough to sustain and undergo constant though nondestructive fluxes of transformation” (Braidotti 2011, 303).
