>Art instead of being an object made by one person is a process set in          motion by a group of people.
>											John Cage

>What about the creator? It is independent of the creator through the self-positing of the created, which is preserved in itself. What is preserved – the thing or the work of art – is a bloc of sensations, that is to say, a compound of percepts and affects.

>							Gilles Deleuze and Felix Guattari


# Setting out

When looking at and reflecting on how a group of people that come together to create theater, music or dance, relate and communicate, there are many aspects and levels through which it is possible to enter.  Some of those are attached to the individual, like his or her life experience, technical expertise, incentive to be a performer/artist in the first place, self-image and confidence, and each of these can be looked at within discrete critical discourses. Other points of reflective entry evolve around the dynamics of the collective, like communicative willingness and potential, social – and artistic – hierarchy, the question and distribution of power, the question of responsibility and respect. All these aspects are of course related and dependent on each other in multiple ways. However, if the collective creative situation is built around the idea of using chance and improvisation as the main tools to instigate the expressive activity – which is the case in the performances we are looking at – the dynamics among all of these aspects become, I would like to suggest, more charged and even more complex to disentangle into separate areas of reflection. Frictions occur instantaneously between such central concepts as freedom and limitations, between the individual and her dependence on and consideration of the group, between the individual desire of expression and the expression of the whole.

Setting out to trace the causality of a creative process dependent on such circumstances might be seen as a futile endeavor, and rightly so, if the aim is to catch the origin of a movement or a sound, or any other expression. That is not the undertaking attempted here. Instead, navigating through this complex flow of energies will be done as an attempt to understand the dynamics of how the collective creation evolves when chance and improvisation steer the progression rather than a predetermined and rehearsed score of some kind. It aspires to shed some light on how the exchange of stimuli and expressions moves and grows within a group of performers. How impulses are given and taken, how listening evolves and effects the expression of the individual performer, how rhythmical structures ensue and transform, how decisions are made, shaped and changed depending on the collective expression at that particular moment. In other words, how a collective expression grows from within and how all the different expressive choices made by the individuals, in their togetherness, generate a process that is indeterminate. How can such a process be thought of as immanent, as an immanent collective creative process, and how can that be analyzed?

In my attempt to answer those questions I will look at seven different aspects of the unfolding of the performative creative process: Immanence in the indeterminate collective creation; the meaning and impact of relations in an immanent creative process; the question of responsibility in such a process; immanence and the shifting of roles; immanence and performing participation; immanence and hierarchy; and lastly, the aspect of the director in immanent creation. The reasoning will commence with outlining the main concepts and their relationship that, in an attempt like this, can become quite complex. This is not only caused by what I talk about in the introduction as the reoccurring critical strategy of transferring philosophical concepts from an ontological level to specified creative esthetic processes, but also from the fact that the concepts I utilize are so closely intertwined that their meaning and function becomes co-dependent and therefore overlaps, and thus might seem to be interchangeable, which they are not. After outlining the central concepts the text looks closely at a short sequence from one of the performances of *John and the Mushrooms*, in which I try to trace how the individual expressions emerge and transform within the ensemble. I suggest ways to see how one expression generates another, then moves into another, and so on, unfolding in an immanent mode. That opening section, intended to provide somewhat of a base for the subsequent problematizations, is followed by a reasoning that focuses on the relations between the different individual expressions, and how they are experienced by the performers. In a collective creative situation where there is a demand on the performers to continuously invent something new, the relational aspects are a complex challenge since the relations constantly have to be determined and performatively negotiated. The reasoning then continues by problematizing the notion of creative responsibility. This aspect is vibrant in an immanent creative process, since the performers are asked to use and rely on their own judgment and sensitivity when shaping their expressions, and not on directorial instructions. How is this demand to instantaneously, *and* in front of an audience, create new expressions and forms for each performance, handled and experienced? The subsequent section is closely related to the previous as it extends the reasoning around performer’s/actor’s creative investment and responsibility by putting it in relation to how it can be looked at historically. It tries to carve out a difference – pointing to a shift – in how the performers work and think when their instant compositional judgment has to encompass the position of each (newly invented) expressional activity in relation to the overall esthetics and intent. In the section that follows the reasoning tries to investigate the actual performer experience of participating in the collective creation. What do the performers sense that they are partaking in?  What is their sense of their relation to all the surrounding elements? My suggestion is that the notion of the *whole* can be used to signify the experience of – and the aspiration for – being together in the expression. The last two parts of the text are concerned, in different ways, with the correlation between my role as director, the performers creativity/responsibility, and the construct of the concept. I propose that there are unavoidable hierarchies that emerge between these fields. Even if an immanent creative process might be seen as open and “free," it creates many fields of tension and those are being looked at through the concept of hierarchy. In such a perspective the role of the director is charged and problematic, and the reasoning ends by trying to disentangle the role of initiator; the function of the director in immanent processes; and the purpose of the performances vs. the purpose of the director.

The reasoning that lies ahead is delimited to the processes happening within the ensembles, in other words disconnected from the relationship between the expression and its reception. Though, the different problems and their expositions in this text can be construed as containing the seeds of the treatment in the two following essays, in which questions around perception, meaning and affect are looked at. What this precisely means is that the creative force, and the emotions within each performing individual around the questions of creative invention, expressive relations, creative responsibility, hierarchy, and so on, change when the constitution of the event changes; from happening in a limited, known, milieu – the rehearsals – to an open public event.

## Consistency and Consolidation

A reoccurring reference throughout this text will be reflections by philosopher and Performance Studies scholar Laura Cull, from her book *Theatres of Immanence, Deleuze and The Ethics of Performance* (2012). The exposition, treatment and formulations offered by Cull, critically examine how an immanent process in the realm of contemporary theater and its creative collaborations, can be defined. In her opening chapter she makes an observation that can serve as a relevant point of departure:
>immanence and transcendence are distinct modes and different ways of understanding creativity and organization. In some forms of organization – whether we are thinking in terms of ontological, social or artistic processes – creation or the production of form relies on ‘a transcendent instance of command’: something that functions as a leader, director or author from a position outside the process itself (Holland 2006, 195). In turn, we can say that this transcendent ‘thing’ need not take the form of a person, but could equally be a different kind of body, like an idea. Whatever form it takes, the role of this transcendent figure is ‘to guarantee coordination’, to impose organization top-down on the chaos of processes or, again, to conceive what to create from the material and to execute that conception (Holland 2006). As Eugene Holland has explained, transcendent modes of creation are those in which the ‘modes and principles of ... organization’ are external to the activity in question – they are neither part of that activity, nor have they issued from it (Holland 2006). In contrast, immanent modes of organization and creativity allow coordination to emerge bottom-up, and the ‘modes and principles of ... organization’ to come from within the processes themselves, not from outside them (Cull 2012, 25).<sup>132</sup>

This quote guides us into some of the important and useful distinctions and dynamics of immanence in the framework of collective creative situations by putting it in relation to what could be seen as its opposite; transcendence. The picture that emerges is a distinct polarity between the two forms of (creative) organization. Though, as we shall see by looking at the experiences of practical theater work, the two forces are in constant dialogue, intertwined and dependent on each other (which of course is prevalent in Cull’s critical treatment). However, if the concept of immanence is the substrate of the critique, taking off from the dynamic suggested by Cull, the exploration extends by making use of some central concepts in the thinking of Gilles Delueze (and Felix Guattari), that are related to the notion of composition. The concept of composition, as outlined in their book *What is Philosophy?* (1994), is securely attached to the creation of art, expressed with a distinct clarity: “Composition, composition is the sole definition of art” (Deleuze and Guattari 1994, 191). Though, the concept of composition is given a necessary complexity when put side by side with the turbulence of chaos, since art is the composition of chaos “that yields the vision of sensation” (Deleuze and Guattari 1994, 204).<sup>133</sup>  Within that sequence, and possible to see as the inner organs of composition, are the concepts *consistency* and *consolidation*. In my reasoning these two concepts are inserted as a complement to the term *relation-of-nonrelation* and meant to function as *descriptive of an immanent (performative) organization* of multiple and seemingly non-connected expressions. So, once again the analysis is making use of philosophical concepts outside their ontological abode, which is why I will try to outline and clarify their use and function in this apparatus.

Deleuzian/Guattarian thinking around the process of consistency and consolidation is encircled by a complex exploration of (ontological) movements of different dimensions and with variable relations that, so to speak, precede the workings of the two concepts.<sup>134</sup> As a slight detour, before moving into consistency and consolidation, I will briefly indicate what I see as relevant in that exploration. The starting point is the concept of chaos, as conceived and formulated by Deleuze (and Guattari). In chaos there are no connections, chaos generates chaos and infinitely undoes every consistency. It is a movement that is “characterized less by the absence of determinations than by the infinite speed with which they take shape and vanish” (Deleuuze and Guattari 1994, 42). On that plane of infinite speed, of disconnection, disappearance and inconsistency the plane of immanence works like a sieve, giving, through its concepts, consistency to chaos. As the first instance above chaos Deleuze and Guattari place the concept of the refrain.<sup>135</sup> It is initially presented as what might be called a primal expression (urge) to mark a territory, a need to “fix a fragile point as center” in the forces of chaos that underlie all immanent movements (Deleuze and Guattari 1987, 344).<sup>136</sup> It should not be understood as a starting point, really, since everything is perpetually becoming, though, it can be seen as the beginning of a new sequence: the refrain to mark a (new) territory, the territorial refrain. Deleuze and Guattari refer to the refrain as a territorial assemblage (which to a certain degree contradicts the use of assemblage as a concept referring to combinations of expressions, and it contradicts their observation that a territory is an outcome of relations) that should be understood as the first stage towards consistency. It is this (self)organization of the refrain and its transmutations that can be viewed as correlating to the occurrence and forming of expressive matter in and by the individual performers. How is that so, and how can we see the improvising performer in this sequence? Well, the correlation can be found in the initial moment of setting forth an expressive figure of some kind: it is a movement or a sound, the seed of an expression, it is in a new born state, it is untested and its possible unfolding is unknown, it is isolated but carries virtual possibilities. As soon as it is put into the world by the performer it becomes a refrain that will grow by and of itself, creating a territory that harbors all the motifs of the refrain and that transforms into its interrelated version. Here, it finds its consistency.

In looking at how the concept of consolidation is used – and how it relates to consistency – I want to refer to the performance of *John and the Mushrooms*, which will also be the focus in the continued analysis. The underlying structural principle of that performance contains two distinctly different forms of organization: The script with its set dialogue, and the rules and placement of the chance-operated parts (both with a transcendent quality, in different ways). As we know by now it is within the chance operated parts that the immanent process is taking place. The structure within these parts is indeterminate, as it evolves through time, ensuing from the development of forms and formations created by the subjects (in view of the above this is what I see as the refrain, searching/finding consistency). The coming into being of this unborn structure is double-edged. Firstly, it can be said to exist only in a supplementary dimension to what it gives rise to, and secondly it becomes, in itself, an important part of the expression. In the immanent creative process there is no plan of organization. Forms and expressions grow unpredictably along lines that ensue from the interplay between each expressive matter. This plane is the plane of (multiple and diversified) consistencies on their way to consolidation. It is a plane of non-contradiction. It is univocal as different expressive matter coexists with no immediate hierarchy, as a plane where the “number of dimensions continually increases as what happens happens, but even so it loses nothing of its planitude” (Deleuze and Guattari 2004, 294). Such a multilayered expressive form could, in the wording of Deleuze and Guattari, be called an assemblage and the notion of consistency concerns the manner in which the different components, the individual expressive matter, holds together within this assemblage. Hence, the problem of consistency emerges when heterogeneous elements are convoked, i.e. making it (consistency) relational, which is the moment when the concept of consolidation becomes relevant. Though obviously, consolidation cannot be descriptive of how relations within the immanent creative process ensue, as relations are everywhere and continuous. Instead it signifies how the individual expression transforms and adjusts through the influence of all the other individual expressions, thus enters into a perpetual reciprocal sequence of transformation – towards consolidation.<sup>137</sup> Further on, in connection with my extended – and exemplified – explication of this process, I will try to expand the understanding of consolidation to encapsulate a certain time aspect, showing that consolidation is a process that in hindsight illuminates the specifics of what has passed. But, as we will see, it is not possible to make a distinct delineation between the two concepts by saying that consistency refers to the birth and forming of individual expressive matter and consolidation to the forming of their interrelatedness. Not only is the process towards consistency (of the individual expressive matter) dependent on and influenced by processes of consolidation, but the collective expression can also be talked about in terms of consistency. A further understanding of how the two concepts are used might be gained by looking at them from the perspective of the performer and what they represent as sensed experience. It is then possible to say that they explicate how the individual expression, in itself as well as in relation to the other individual expressions, is sensed as both unstable and stable. However, that is not a perspective that can be used in this reasoning, and neither can the terms stable and unstable, as they represent a binary dynamic that is disconfirmatory to the processual outlook that the concepts consistency and consolidation represent. But as we listen to the performers reflecting on their creative process, the experience of such a polarity is clearly present and that observation can be used to illuminate the opposite, to underscore the transformational and processual movements that lie within the concepts consistency and consolidation.

## Immanence and collective creation

An immanent process within a collective creative situation is, as outlined in the foreword, signified by how the creative expression is set in motion through the initiative and judgment of each performer involved. Cull expands on this: “The material bodies involved in the creative process do not obey commands issued from a transcendent source, but generate their own rules and forms of creation” (Cull 2012, 25). I imagine such a collective creative situation to look something like this: A group of actors and/or musicians are gathered together in a specific space. They have agreed on making something together. This agreement can include or not include rules and/or instructions. In the latter case, the chain of activity – expression–stimuli–reaction/expression – is set in motion from an unpredictable point, it evolves collectively through paths shaped by each individual’s artistic judgment which in turn is affected by the stimuli he or she experiences in the moment.<sup>138</sup> But the immanent process can also be set in motion and be steered by specific material that the performers are given – by themselves (or somebody else), rules and instructions that infuse a specific type of material, or a set length, or other limitations.<sup>139</sup> That is how the performances  'John and the Mushrooms* and *vorschläge* were conceptually built.<sup>140</sup> The performers were confronted with an instruction or a text that had to be interpreted and transformed into an expression in the moment of the performance. To further link the concept of immanence as a creative force to the specific circumstances of the concepts and processes involved, it is necessary to explore in detail what happens when the performers move into the first chance generated section of *John and the Mushrooms*.

Kom ihåg - följande som en lista typ. Se manus!
Box One, Variation #51:<sup>141</sup>
 14.15      Kristine starts to play music on the grand piano.<sup>142</sup>  
The others are putting their boxes back, looking at their pieces of paper with instructions, preparing, not making sounds but moving their bodies as if thinking, looking at the different materials that lie on their tables.
John throws a coin up in the air, it falls on the floor, he looks at it, picks it up,
15.03       The piano music stops.
John goes back to one of his tables. Jessica looks at Staffan doing what he is doing, then she walks over to the piano, looks into it, looks at Kristine, then walks back to her table, sits down, thinks, making gestures.
15.17       Anna starts playing the violin.
Kristine almost immediately starts playing the piano.
15.33	Staffan takes a big piece of pink cardboard paper and a scissors, walks to the middle of the space, kneels down and starts cutting the paper.
Jessica moves in towards Staffan and puts an orange on the floor next to the pink paper Staffan is cutting.
The music with violin and piano, played in a broken, pointillistic style, continues.
Jessica goes back to her table, picks up something small off of it, a piece of paper.
15.53	At the same time as Jessica picks up her paper Mauritz starts to dance, a sequence with straight arms moving out, straight swinging legs. The dance sequence continues as he bends his body. It moves into a slowness, stillness, then sharp fast moves, standing still erect, then lying down.
Staffan keeps cutting, now while standing up in the middle of the room.
Jessica moves away from her table, towards the piano, then back again to table, arranging small papers.
Music continues – Mauritz’s dance sequence proceeds – Staffan is cutting his paper, standing, moves to his table, puts the scissors down – Jessica is by her table occupied with paper and tape.
Staffan has cut out a kind of rake. He puts paper clips on the floor, starts raking the clips with his paper rake.
Kristine stops playing the piano and picks up some large papers from the floor, starts working/playing with them, making paper-sounds.
Violin continues playing.
16.36        Jessica moves a little bit away from her table and starts speaking, reciting a text.
(Ingen vila finns …) She moves around in the room while talking.
Staffan takes a box of dice and paper clips from his table and pours everything out in different places in the room. Mauritz keeps dancing, sometimes looking at his watch.
17.16        Anna stops playing the violin. Jessica is still speaking, moving around.
17.22	Mauritz stops dancing, he goes to his chair, takes his scarf and puts it around his head. He folds his chair up, takes it in his right hand, starts walking around in the room close to the audience and speaks/sings a made-up language, sometimes directing himself straight towards someone in the audience.
Staffan has taken up his pink paper-rake again. He goes to the middle of the room and picks up a big blue paper. He holds it in his left hand and rakes paper clips that lay on the floor.
17.57        Jessica stops talking and goes to her table
18.20        Kristine and Anna start playing Harmony together at the electric piano.
Jessica slowly walks around the room.
Mauritz puts his chair in the middle of the room and sits down on it with his scarf on his head. He sits still.
Staffan is on the floor on his knees with the blue paper that he cuts into a rake-shape. He folds it.
Jessica has started reciting her text again, in front of Mauritz who looks at her as if he was her audience.
Staffan is walking around with both his rakes, to different points in the room and rakes up paper clips.
20.07       Music stops.
Jessica takes the last word of her text, standing in the middle in front of Mauritz, she makes a crescendo with her voice, like a high pitch tone, almost a scream. Mauritz applauds her. He stands up then sits down again.
Mauritz stands up, gives her a short applaud again, then takes his chair and puts it back to where it stood before.
Jessica improvises a text about the sun and the earth, about movement that never stops.
Staffan is down on his knees raking up paper clips with his blue rake.
20.42	Kristine starts playing the piano softly, with a few scattered high-pitched notes. Jessica moves softly, round and round in the middle of the room, with the orange in her left hand and a long stick in her right, twirling round and round, while speaking.
		Mauritz has sat down on his chair and is looking at his instruction papers.
20.57	Anna walks over to the sheet of music that is attached to the east wall, and starts to play the piece, simultaneously as the piano is improvising.
		Jessica has now moved to her table, and sits down on the floor beside it.
		Staffan is now by the north wall raking paper clips with both his rakes, close to the audience.
21.15	Mauritz leaves his chair and walks up close to the audience along the north wall. He sits down and starts telling a story.
		The piano music gets more intense, more energy, flowing, alternately dense and fragile.
		Anna has left the music sheet on the wall and has moved to the grand piano, directing her sounds into it, improvising.
		Jessica sits by her table thinking, listening.
Staffan gets up. His blue rake is full of paperclips. He walks over to one of his tables.
22.06	Mauritz stops telling his story, stands up and walks over to the opposite wall and the audience that sits there. He sits down and starts telling his story again.
		Anna walks, while playing, over to the west wall, next to the electric piano. When she does this Staffan stands up on his yellow table with his watch in his hand, and looks at it.
22.50	Mauritz stops his storytelling, and walks back to his chair. Staffan drops all the paper clips from his blue rake down onto the floor while standing on the yellow chair. Anna stops playing the violin. The piano music continues.
		Mauritz sits on his chair. Staffan has come down and is now raking paper clips right in front of Mauritz.
23.20	Anna walks into the middle of the room and starts singing Once upon a Time.
		Kristine stops playing the piano and they all come up, forming a circle close to Anna, and start to sing.

Kom ihåg länk 21. [LINK: to this specific film sequence John and the Mushrooms, Variation #51]

When going through the above description of the fifty-first variation of *John and the Mushrooms* we know that their actions derive from instructions that the performers pulled out of their boxes a few minutes earlier. We do not know precisely which instruction the performers are working with, but we know it comes from box number one.<sup>143</sup> Each expression has an autonomous quality and follows an individual trajectory (even though the section that we will be looking more closely at starts with Anna and Kristine interpreting the music together). This quality of semi-isolation was prevalent more or less throughout the chance generated sections, since the concept (rules and instructions) guided the performer to stay within an individual sensitivity in respect to form and development. Portent in this dynamic of individual expressions that moves simultaneously but not synchronized lies the possibility to construe how the immanent process ensues as the tension between the different performative trajectories become more clear.

As an attempt to trace the immanent process of one short section, starting at 18.20 ending at 20.57, in performance number 51, I suggest the following: Kristine and Anna are by the electric piano playing one of the Cage pieces (*Harmony 19*) which has a soft and somewhat slow expression. The progression of this piece is fully determined by the musical score. The other members of the ensemble have probably heard this piece sometime before, so it can be assumed that it creates a feeling of “known element” in the group.<sup>144</sup> Indicated by Jessica’s wide-walking circular movement throughout the room, the music seems to open up the space. When she passes the two musicians she sings very softly along with the music, like imitating some of the notes in the melody. The obvious performative, stringent quality of the music creates the possibility of “sitting down and listening,” which is what Mauritz does. Right after the music starts he takes his chair, places it in the middle of the room, sits down, moving his hand, his finger, slowly, along with the music. He looks at the orange on the floor that Jessica had placed there earlier. Halfway through the piece of music Jessica starts reciting a text about outer space and about time. She does this “within” the ongoing music, which has an effect on how she handles the rhythmical presentation of the text, giving it a calm, fragmented quality. It also makes her increase the volume and she pushes the timbre of her voice towards *Sprechgesang*. She is standing, whirling, right in front of Mauritz who has clearly become her “audience.” When Kristine and Anna have finished playing the entire piece and the music stops, Jessica repeats her last sentence and makes a crescendo, letting her voice grow almost to a scream, into space. Mauritz then stands up from his chair and starts to applaud. Jessica acknowledges thanks with a light nod and then walks towards the audience on the east wall and starts improvising a story about the earth and the sun and outer space. Her arms are flung outwards, moving in circles as she speaks. Mauritz takes his chair and walks to his “place.” During this time, Staffan is occupied with going to different places in the room where he has dropped paper clips, raking them up alternately with his pink or blue paper rake. Kristine now moves from the electric piano to the upright piano and soon into Jessica’s text she starts to play a high pitch, a twinkling and sparse improvisation that “surrounds” Jessica’s words and whirling movement.

It is relevant to assume that the expression and form of the music by Cage that Anna and Kristine are playing, has an impact on how Jessica’s and Mauritz’ expressive trajectories are shaped. This is underscored by the fact that Staffan’s activity so clearly is not effected. The music’s impact on Jessica and Mauritz can be described as working on a level of atmosphere (mode) as well as on a rhythmical and situational/relational level (narrative). Jessica has maybe not decided to recite her text when the music starts. She passes the musicians and when doing this she picks up a tone and sings very softly and briefly. From that point on it is clear that she is allowing the music to have a strong influence on the performative quality of her actions, if not exactly which specific text to recite, at least how it is shaped. The fact that she extends the music after it has stopped by using her voice, underscores her attentive listening: her vocal expression grows and “continues” the instrumental music. Just before this sequence starts, Mauritz has been playing/acting with onomatopoetic sounds, as if telling a story in a made-up language, walking around, close to the audience, carrying his chair. At the beginning of the sequence, his actions reach a point of saturation. It seems like he is accepting this, not really pushing forward with an activity.<sup>145</sup> Though, when the music starts the impression is that the room opens up for his body to move. He is surrounded by the music and it is reasonable to assume that he gets an impulse from it that sets him in motion. Slowly, within the temporal quality of the music, he stands up and again picks up his chair and moves towards the center of the room where he sits down and listens. His position, which is chosen with a clear relational awareness of the orange in front of him, and his “audience-like” concentration is almost immediately picked up on by Jessica who, while performing her text, takes the orange and performs her text and movement right in front of him. An intersubjective relation is formed, trajectories merge, feed from each other and the immanent process produces what could be described as a representational form (a possible narrative). This “scene” within the sequence could be seen as pulling together four of the five performers into one dramaturgical “whole” as the music that Kristine and Anna are playing accompanies Jessica’s performance, for which, in turn, Mauritz becomes the “audience.”<sup>146</sup>  When Mauritz returns his attention to Jessica by standing up and applauding, the causality of their actions is further validated. The short moment of silence that follows pulls the dynamic of the voices down to a different level. Jessica starts speaking much more softly and intimately which – and here the impulses become reversed, actor performance feeding musical performance – makes Kristine improvise a soft and high pitched phrase on the upright piano, somewhat connected to Jessica’s telling about the sky and the stars. The twinkling, twirling quality of the music can then be assumed to affect Jessica’s brief, soft dancing movement.

Although Staffan’s activity during this sequence does not seem to be influenced by the activities of the others, it is not as if his actions are isolated and not interacting with the rest. That would be a misinterpretation. He is conscious of his *difference* and the friction that he creates. He might also be experiencing his own actions in the perspective of the whole. The interesting question is then, if the immanent process can be said to be influenced by his somewhat isolated trajectory and seeming indifference to what is going on around him, even if the signs of interactivity are not there? In what way does his “independence” influence the quality of the other performers’ expression? Is the stubborn perpetuation and isolation of Staffan’s action affecting the others on the inside but not explicitly in relation to what they are doing? These assumptions around the impact of Staffan’s expressive activity conjure up the question of what the specifics of an immanent process are, and how that process can be described, if it is not affirmed by established - visible, audible - signs of affect? Is that question a contradiction in terms since the (immanent) movements of silence and stillness belong to the incorporeal and ineffable inner world? As immanence is everywhere and perpetual, every event - lived, observed, acknowledged – holds the movement of immanence, and since immanence as definition encapsulates relation – between all movement – we must yield to the observation that even if we cannot describe - see or hear - any effect of Staffan’s performative activity within the expressive action of the ensemble, it is – as we shall see – an influential part of the experience and perception of the whole. This means that to reach for an understanding of the impact of Staffan’s activity on the immanent process we need to look at the (compositional) interplay between the different expressive parts through the concept of consistency on the plane of immanence, and through the concept of consolidation and counterpoint.

The expressive force of a dynamic like the one in the scene we have just looked at, is dependent on its consolidation. Multiple expressive matters are superimposed and their possibility of consolidating, creating what can be experienced as a togetherness, is dependent on the characteristics of each matter; “the matters of expression themselves must present characteristics making this taking on of consistency possible” (Deleuze and Guattari 2004, 363). In the collective creative situation, each performer, even when staying within his own expressive trajectory, is in a highly perceptive state, which generates a flexibility that increases the possibility for consistency to occur (this could mean that each individual expression would take on a different consistency in a different milieu). But this is not what ensures consolidation. Rather, as consolidation is inherently creative and something that grows from the relational tension that emerges between expressive matter, its succession is durational. It creates itself not from adjustments made according to a preconceived notion of homogeneity but from the birth of disparate rhythms, “an articulation from within of an interrhythmicity” (Deleuze and Guattari 2004, 362).<sup>147</sup> How can this be understood? Well, different expressive matters are simultaneously put into the space. No preconceived narrative or metric linkage is in play. Movements, sounds and vocal expressions with different dynamics, different timbre and different articulations are “forced” into the same space and time zone. From this, more or less chaotic compound of expressions, the consolidation grows through a process that has two interrelated levels. One is characterized by the intuitive rearranging of intervals of different kinds (time, dynamics, articulation). These adjustments are made on a micro level, not noticeable as changes in the material or expressive trajectory but rather as a distribution of inequalities. The second level of the consolidation process is what might be called the emerging acceptance of difference; the unavoidable coexistence of expressions establish, over time, a consistency (through inter-rhythmicity) of a never before existed kind from which consolidation ensues. It may be so that in such a succession it is the most disparate component that assures the consistency of the assemblage.<sup>148</sup> And it is precisely this dynamic that occurs in the scene we have just looked at. The performative activity of Staffan – the raking of paper clips – takes on the quality of a vector, consolidating the expressive whole of the totality of expressive matters, and it pushes the demands for accepting (perceptually) synergetic structures. It underscores the fact that the immanent collective creative process is unruly and results in a “new” complexity signified by unstable relations creating their own consistency. Brian Massumi’s view on this instability is an extension of the notion and creation of consistency: “I try to emphasize that the notion of the virtual requires that all relation actually be seen as a relation-of-nonrelation. Connection and relation, such as they are, are not always exhilarating. They can be terrifying. Or boring. Or restricting” (Massumi 2011, 84). This dynamic is assumedly felt both within the ensemble and in the audience. Though, even if this is an assumption that cannot be verified, it points to the important compositional aspect that the expressive relations within the ensemble, that transpired from the immanent process, are to a certain degree disjunctive. Difference in temporal as well as “narrative” trajectories creates a bundle of expressions that “can be seen as a practice for bringing awareness of the disjunctive operations of experiential fusion to the surface of [dance], making consciously felt the fact that the compositional principle of this technique of existence, like all techniques of existence, is *always* differential. There is always disjunction. No technique of existence can so purify its field as to make it homogeneous: simply non-relational. All techniques of existence operate through relations-of-nonrelation. Experiential fusion-effects. Mutual inclusion of heterogeneity of factors becoming, singular-generically, forces of pure expression. “Pure” does not mean homogenous or simply all. “Pure” means: having the compositional power to mutually include; to bring differentials of experience together across their disjunction, to unitary experiential effect; to effectively convert heterogeneous outside factors into immanent forces of singular-generic expression” (Massumi 2011, 144).<sup>149</sup> In other words, consistency necessarily occurs between heterogeneities, “not because it is the birth of differentiation, but because heterogeneities that were formerly content to coexist or succeed one another become bound up with one another through the ‘consolidation’ of their coexistence and succession” (Deleuze and Guattari 1987, 364). There is a saturation of the event happening, it becomes full, even though confusing on a certain level. The activity of Staffan, seemingly disconnected, influences the consolidation through its placing in time and space, in relation to the other singular movements. However, to eliminate Staffan’s activity, to pull him out of the room, would not push the combined expression into a non-consolidated state but force it to reconfigure, transform its balance, to deterritorialize. This is a consequence of the conceptual structure of the performance: the consolidation is not produced through specific multiple expressive matters simultaneously moving through time, but through the compositional decision of making them happen within the one limited field of perception.

The simultaneously ongoing expressive activities, in *John and the Mushrooms* as well as in the other two performances we are looking at, can be thought of as an instant composition of counterpoint. In traditional music theory the concept of counterpoint has a more or less strict technical meaning, whereas in the esthetic thinking of Deleuze it is developed and used in a way that, while still strongly attached to the notion of composition, evokes the effect of superimpositions and polyphony, well outside the framework of music and musical structures. In *What is Philosophy?* Deleuze and Guattari introduce the concept of counterpoint in relation to processes in nature, presenting images of how different territories cut “across the territories of other species” forming points of junction: “There is counterpoint whenever a melody arises as a ‘motif’ within another melody, as in the marriage of bumblebee and snapdragon” (Deleuze and Guattari 1994, 185). If the reason to activate the problem of consistency within the immanent creative process is to elucidate how the convergence of seemingly disparate expressive matters conflate and consolidate, then the activation of the concept of counterpoint would in turn be to observe the effect of polyphonic presence of semantic expressions happening in the immanent collective creation. Words are spoken at the same time and with different directions, stories and vocal expressions with different energy and intention share the same time and space; a polyphony of voices fills the room. Even if language were spoken, and individual performative adjustments of the kind described above, were made, this mesh sometimes resulted in a polyphony (especially in the performance of *John and the Mushrooms*) with a consolidating quality beyond semantics, as it did not report real or fictional conversations but brought “out the madness of all conversation and of all dialogue, even interior dialogue” (Deleuze and Guattari 1994, 188). Perceived in such a way, the immanent collective process produces an expression of counterpoint that mirrors the ongoing diversity of statements in the world, outside the performance. But from within, as we will hear from the performers later on, the effect of polyphonic semantic language seemed to infuse a sense of hierarchy between expressions and tension between the performers (which did not occur in the same way when music and bodily movement dominated the assemblage). This, in turn, intuitively increased the willingness to adjust the different expressions along counterpoint thinking, like shifting duration and expressive dynamic to create contrast of a supporting kind. The concept of counterpoint, as a definition of different relations/problems ensuing from superimpositions, was more present in the discussions within the ensemble, than the concepts of consistency and consolidation.

Does consolidation always happen in an immanent collective creative process? Did it happen in every chance operated section, in every performance of *John and the Mushrooms*? Is it at all relevant to pose these questions when the movements on the plane of immanence are continuous and obviously produce consistency and consolidation regardless of whether or not this is acknowledged, in the theater or elsewhere? Instead the question has to be how and when was this experienced by the ensemble? To think about consolidation in relation to what the performer experiences, means that the concept is loosened up (or contaminated) by personal experiences and opinions and as a result the sense of consolidation differs from performer to performer. When the performers describe their experiences in the following, using words like connectivity, togetherness, communication, relations and listening, it becomes clear that consolidation was not regularly sensed, rather the opposite. Struggles with their compositional/expressional relationships were continuously discussed – to an extent that it became part of the process towards an awareness – outside the rehearsal/performance situation, but also implicitly in the performance where it came out as a sense of over-saturation and confusion. *It is exactly at this point in the collective creation that the immanent process finds its impetus for change and transformation, it is where conjugations and connections of a new kind come to constitute the consistency of each expressive matter and consolidation is reconfigured*. Brian Massumi reflects on this dynamic when he says: “By intensity I mean the immanent affirmation of a process, in its own terms. This is not a stated affirmation. It is an activity. It is when a process tends to the limit of what only it can do, and in that act resonantly embraces its own range of variation” (Massumi 2011, 84). Relations of various kinds, with different dynamics and characteristics is what the immanent creative process continuously produces, giving rise to a chain of problems. Hence, it is these various relations we need to locate and analyze.

## Immanence and Relations

For the actor, the dancer and the musician, the continuous demand for invention and making new meant an extensive challenge regarding the relational aspects of the different expressions that were created. Most often the actor builds his or her expression in relation to the intent and action of the character portrayed, as well as to the intent and actions of the other characters on stage, and also in relation to the development of the narration. A similar relational creative process can be observed, even though most often in a more abstract and implicit way, in the collective creation of music and dance. An immanent process and its inherent indeterminate progression create a flux in the relationships between the performers on stage. This was underscored by the fact that the fictional situation in the performances was conceptually formulated as “a space where people (the performers) were involved in an ongoing undetermined process of building new things.” This formulation of a relational sublevel was sometimes – and sometimes not – in their need to feel connected, made use of by the performers. A fluctuation in their trust in the conceptual impact of the performance, as well as a wavering belief in their own expressional force were two factors that led the performers to seek contact and consciously create relations. This was most clear in the case of *John and the Mushrooms* where the demands looked different since the performers had both a character to portray and texts with a fictional quality to execute, most often with a monologic structure. This was commented on by the actor Mauritz saying:” It was hard to feel the relations … Towards the end we found it, some kind of dynamic in the fact that ‘now she is talking over there, and now he is talking over there and now I am speaking over here’ and then one could feel like ‘now we are, together, in this racket,’ and now it is calm and now I am here doing my thing and … It took a very long time before I got to that place, before I could feel it. We talked about it after a performance one day, we all had a sense that ‘Now something happened,’ that we all were there at the same time but still doing our own things. During a period it was like we got too nice and too considerate, we started to listen a little bit too much and then the listening just became like ‘now you can talk and then you can talk and then I can dance’. It took a while until we came to see that we are doing everything by ourselves at the same time but still together. In the beginning I was so focused on doing my instruction and just that. But then I really started to enjoy performing, acting when I could do my thing and at the same time be a part of the whole.” The process that Mauritz describes can be understood as an increased sensitivity to new ways of experiencing participation and how his own activity extends to the others, and the other activities that are going on parallel to his own. This relates to Laura Cull’s observation, when she says “Deleuze’s immanence precisely concerns the participation, multiplication and extension of the human body – understood as that which is produced by relations of force and encounters with the affects of other bodies” (Cull 2012, 10). To be more precise one could say that what Mauritz experienced is the emergence of new, what Deleuze calls “points of counterpoint” and that he finds a balance in relation to the autonomous fixity or variability of the expressive matters surrounding him. This leads us to a fundamental observation, applicable to all the instant compositional expressions we are looking at, *that the relation is prior to what it places in relation* (Deleuze and Guattari  2004).

Although connectivity is everything and relations are constitutive, it should be noted that the complexity of the interrelatedness of the expression is increased by the fact that the individual expression is not immediately, or inevitably, or constantly, in a transformative relation to its surrounding. The construction of the concept calls for an autonomy of expressions. This certainly does not factor out that internal impulses also stem from simultaneously ongoing expression.  The individual expression cannot, and does not want to be unaffected by the movements of the surrounding components. So, the expression created by the performer is, on the one hand, in search of an individual autonomy and stability, and on the other hand is fully aware that it cannot find its pulse outside its relations (Deleuze, and Guattari 2004). One cannot therefore assume that the determination of the expressive matter corresponds to its inherent potentiality, in an autonomous sense, but instead it is defined through its relational potentiality. This is further explicated in the observation that expressive qualities or matters of expression, in effect, enter shifting relations with one another that ‘express’ the workings of the internal (individual) impulses as well as the circumstances in which they occur (Deleuze and Guattari 2004). Which is to say that each expressive matter seizes its compositional value in relation(s). However, a compositional relation is not produced but inevitable, therefore we can call it passive: it needs only to be acknowledged to find its form. Since these passive compositional relations, within an immanent collective creative situation, are not left alone, but instead adjusted, reconfigured along the line of representational assumptions as well as socialization, their expressive determination becomes reciprocal. Each individual expression “understands” its expressiveness only when its relation has become qualitative.

With this in mind, if we return to the performers and the dynamics of the relational aspect within the ensembles, we can detect that the feelings surrounding this aspect and the approach to it partly differed from the musicians to the actors and dancers, but it also seemed to shift during the process of performing. The musician Kristine in the performance of *John and the Mushrooms* said: “Well, you know I have my instrument and I’m so kind of tied to it, and it was so interesting that the others came to me. I searched for relations more musically, through my instrument. So I guess I could say, yes, I searched for musical relations, but I appreciated very much that the others came to me. I found that really delightful.” Sometimes the performers expressed a need for contact affirmed in a more conventional way through interactions and listening where signs of affect were more obvious. This need was more obvious in the beginning of the process when the level of insecurity was higher and the urge to establish a collective practice was more strongly felt. Kristine went on to explain:” Sure, I searched for relations, that was very important. And I think that was our way of solving things, in a way. We realized that we needed a lot of contact with each other. That became our way of approaching some problems that were there in the beginning. It was important with contact and relations because it also created some tension.” The longer the performers were involved in creating a multilayered structure, their ability to experience contact and communication grew and changed. The musician Anna in *John and the Mushrooms* commented on this when she said that the “…relations became more and more important. In the beginning they were not, as I was so into a conceptual way of thinking: ‘I’ll do my thing and you do yours’ but then it got more and more so, it kind of got necessary… and it made it more fun. When we really had a broader focus, when my view took in the whole picture, then it grew, the concept grew.” In other words, the search for relations ensued partly from a need to understand the possible impact of each performative expression and receive confirmation of this, but also, on the contrary, from an increased capability to feel free and playful enough to experience the force of the multilayered structure. Anna continues by saying: ”I think one wants to create relations and connections and communication. Of course you need to keep your own focus strictly, but at the same time it gets really boring if you just stick to your own thing. Sure, I believe in that, but things happened that you never could have anticipated. Ever. I will never forget one performance when all of us just suddenly, in a kind of whirling energy, just stopped exactly at the same time. Subito, like that, really strong. Everybody was doing things but it was so clear to all of us ‘now, this is it,’ this is the peak, kind of. Suddenly it was as if we were sucked into something, very strong.”

The performers expressed at different times a clear understanding of the overarching esthetics of the concepts, as well as of the perceptual ambition behind them. But it would be a misinterpretation, as I have already indicated, to read their search for confirmative relations within the collective process as something more than a sign of a certain inability to trust and find meaning within the seemingly unorganized turbulence of expressive matter. However, this inability should be understood as something that came and went. The sense of disorganization and lack of relations occurred in moments of transformation, in moments of the immanent transcoding – as Deluze would have put it – of the expressive assemblage. Those were moments when the consistency of the assemblage was sensed as losing its consolidation hence experienced by the performers as a dissolving of relations. The transformative quality of these passages, lacking in confirmative relational articulations, conjured up a feeling of isolation followed by a wavering confidence in the autonomy of the individual expression. There are two levels at this particular moment in the creative process that can be reflected on from the point of view of relations. One is about the tendency to capture/create relations of a representative kind, and the other reveals how duration reconfigures the experience of relations.

As I have asserted earlier it is during moments of transformation that the immanent creative process produces the most vibrant mode of presence in the ensemble (as well as for the audience). These are problem-moments, moments of a problematic energy and as such they are crucial to the progression of all the different expressions in the collective. Conversely they present the performers with the challenge to harbor a double view of the dynamics of their activity: the expression of their individual doings and the expression of the collective (composition) as a whole. It can be suggested that even if the collective expression just moments earlier (in a hypothetical sequence) was experienced by the performers as both new (never-before-experienced) and relationally satisfying, the readiness to acknowledge and experience relations as consolidative *outside* recognizable (representational) patterns is subsumed by the tendency to search for something supposedly similar (type of relations). The encounter with experiencing the-never-before-experienced is then not carried along and used as a reinforcement for confidently staying within the individual expression and all the unexpected relations that the phase of transcoding conjures up. In *Difference and Repetition* Deleuze fortifies his critique of representation in relation to the faculty of thinking and diagnoses the tendency of staying with the known as “the postulate of the model, or of recognition” (Deleuze 1994, 167).

Preceding the experience of a coming-together, that Anna’s description above tells us about, the structure of the expressive matters, that exists on the plane of univocity, was an experience of no relations. Though, these are not moments of non-relations. They are sensed as disjunctive and as a-rhythmical, but at the same time they are phases on their way to passing into coordination, as movements of transcoding in which the relations of the future are encapsulated. Just moments later this experience of a disjunctive type of relation will fold back and generate, not a turning of time, but an awareness of time, as the experience of the past energy is illuminated by the present experience. The relations of the present encapsulate the relations of the past, and also of the future. When the performers get a sense of relations (of a confirmative kind) their notion of past relations changes, or rather, they become aware of the relational quality that they just left behind. We can take this even further by observing that the experience of relations is constant, but inevitably dependent on an acknowledgment of change, transformation and difference. The challenge behind accepting relations characterized by difference, experienced in the complexity of being in the midst of a creative assemblage dominated by multiplicity and difference – what Cage would describe as anarchic harmony –– is made more understandable by Deleuze when he says,  “It is in difference that movement is produced as an ’effect,’ that phenomena flash their meaning like signs. The intense world of differences, in which we find the reason behind qualities and the being of the sensible, is precisely the object of superior empiricism. This empiricism teaches us a strange ’reason,’ that of the multiple, chaos and difference (nomadic distributions, crowned anarchies). It is always differences which resemble one another, which are analogous, opposed or identical: difference is behind everything, but behind difference there is nothing” (Deleuze 1994, 57). Neither in the thinking of Deleuze nor in the framework of the performances can difference be seen as opposed to relations. Although the above quote could conjure up the image of a frightening void, the formulation must be seen in the light of the radical criticism that Deleuze put forward in *Difference and Repetition*, where difference is placed as the condition for all becoming, thus beyond the fixity of representation. Difference is the affirmation of infinite variation and relations are a constant, they cannot be dissolved, since they are an outcome of each other, inseparable. Therefore, the problematization of the relations within the immanent collective creation should be understood as happening on two separate levels. The first is the unavoidable ontological level where every relation is weighed by its dramaturgical effect. In the second level, the dynamics of relations should be seen as carrying connotations that are more confirmative than conceptual, akin to relations already experienced. The awareness within the ensembles of the conflation of these two levels of relations emerged as an increased, sometimes frustrating, understanding of the relationship between the individual expression and its compositional impact, complicating the notion of creative responsibility.

# Immanence and creative responsibility

The possibilities are infinite? Chance and improvisation create openings but also fear and insecurity. Indeterminacy is an asset as well as a cause for confusion. Embedded in the immanent creative process, undetachable but fluid in definition, lie areas of friction that have to be looked at in order to understand the esthetic possibilities, as well as the problems. In the moment of the performative situation these areas evolve around the demand for creative responsibility and individual esthetic decisions, around the question of communication, listening and contact, and around the dynamics of dominance and subordination. My experience is that the dynamic in these areas of friction, in which the demands on the individual performer extend far beyond interpretation, is actually different for actors than for musicians and dancers, and that the indeterminate creative collective process causes different type of frictions and is handled differently by these different groups.<sup>150</sup> But the common denominator within an immanent process - as a time and space where people (the performers) are involved in an undetermined ongoing process of investigation and tha building of new things – is that the performers must rely on their own judgment and sensitivity when shaping their expressions. Most often, this is a positive energy in a creative practice but it took on a starkly different dynamic in the performances we are talking about, since the concepts demanded that new expressions and forms had to be created for each performance, instantaneously and in front of an audience. When facing this requirement for a continuous and instant invention, tensions and problems transpired. The actor Staffan Göthe commented on this: “But the really uncomfortable difficulty was when I felt that I had no ideas, and that had nothing to do with the audience sitting there waiting. Instead it was like I just couldn’t make something up and then I thought to myself ‘I guess I can sit here and play *I have no ideas’* …and in some ways that made me feel inhibited.”  So, even if there is no real demand to create an action, and even if the actor has an instruction that he could use as incentive for his activity, the demand, from within himself, is that he should come up with an idea for an action. The immanent energy is then – as Staffan experienced it – at rest, it does not exert a creative force in that moment; he feels inhibited. This is an internal emotional state that does not stop the immanent process but the feeling growing inside the performer is one of being stuck. In every day life, this would not be the case. Staffan would probably not have the same experience, but what is conjured up by the performative situation is a pressure to perform, to show something and it is this demand that creates the feeling of incapability. He calls it the entertainment-devil: “You know, it was about keeping the entertainment-devil away, not to think about satisfying the audience. To dare to do this, to walk the thin line, and not start questioning: Does the audience understand this, do they think this is boring, have nine minutes passed yet, nothing is happening and blablabla … That is the real challenge, to keep those thoughts away all the time. And you know, if one manages to do that everything just takes off, but if you doubt and start looking around, judging the expression from the outside like ‘now it is boring’ and start blocking yourself thinking ‘I can’t do this, I have to come up with something else’… it is just very important to keep those thoughts away.” The feeling of being stuck comes from the idea that he must contribute something important to the expression, and he feels that he is doing nothing. With this in mind, it is possible to say that the immanent process is not something that is at the surface of the performer’s consciousness. It is moving beneath. There is comprehension of how the performance is conceptualized and of immanence as a perpetual force, but there is a blockage that stops him from seeing the present moment as full and generous, thus assign meaning to his stillness and inactivity.

But what is really hardest for Staffan: this feeling of having no ideas followed by inactivity *or* an activity repeated with no intention? He says: “But sometimes I took refuge in my action with the rake and the shovel because I had no other ideas, nothing came up. I thought, ‘I guess I can try with the rake and the shovel.’ And that was something I felt as terribly, terribly unpleasant.” Here we have a reaction to repetition conceived as not different enough. The actor demands from himself to be the author of his action – a desire that shows that he is inclined to regard his own activity apart from the collective, which in turn discloses an unawareness of the difference that ensues from synergy – and when that is not captured there is a sense of failure, of being deprived. He does not want to appear to be doing just anything but instead wants to feel that what he is doing is fresh and above repetition. A way to expose the complexity – and expansiveness – of this predicament is to place it next to a comment by Deleuze in which he aligns himself with Kierkegaard and Nietzsche in their critic of Hegel, and that he – Hegel - does not go beyond false movement and the abstract logical movement of mediation: “They want to put metaphysics in motion, in action. They want to make it act, and make it carry out immediate acts. It is not enough, therefore, for them to propose a new representation of movement; representation is already mediation. Rather, it is a question of producing within the work a movement capable of affecting the mind outside of all representation; it is a question of making movement itself a work, without interposition; of vibrations, rotations, whirlings, gravitations, dances or leaps which directly touch the mind” (Deleuze 1994, 8). We will have a number of reasons to return to this quote, but in this instance, inserting such a perspective on Staffan’s situation of feeling stuck and inadequate, one could assume that he is searching for a way to dodge mediation. He expects the immanent force to be of a particular dynamic in order to produce and insert an energy that can be recognized - and felt - as a stimuli resulting in a true movement. When illuminated through the complexity of the theatrical presentation, with its restraining presumptions and cultural expectations of what theater should be and what an actor/musician should do, as well as through the emotional problems surrounding the creative demands, the immanent process is split into two diverging directions: the perpetual immanent force, which the inactive actor loses sight of, and the immanent process within the collective creative situation. Accordingly, even if Staffan feels isolated – and maybe even longing for a transcendent energy – he is not disconnected from the immanent process, from the other bodies populating the performance (and the world).  He is within that organism, his consistency is transforming but he is still contributing to the consolidation of the assemblage.  Though, that is not what he experiences. He feels that the situation is perishing, a feeling of non-relation, out of touch of feeling the relation of non-relation. For Brian Massumi it is important to give these states their due “without imposing a value judgment on them from outside or at a general level. Giving continuity and relation their due also involves doing the same for discontinuity, because they are necessarily implicated in each other. Something that is continuous with itself is so precisely because it detaches its activity from the outside it absolutely lives-in” (Massumi 2011, 84).

In the context of collective improvisation, immanence can therefore be described as a generating process that escapes the control of its originator. A tone, a movement, a word instantly sets off a response, that in turn effects the trajectory of the first energy (player). The expressive force of the two parallel activities merging into something that no one could foresee can therefore possibly result in an expression in which the individual performer feels lost and maybe even disconnected. Even though the quality of the concept of *John and the Mushrooms* and its intention regarding the perceptual impact was thoroughly discussed and processed during rehearsals – and carried out specifically with the intent to reduce just this fear of not contributing to the expression of the performance with a discrete and autonomous expressive matter – the feeling of being stuck and inadequate was seemingly not possible to avoid. In her reflections on how an immanent process has been used by theater practitioners in late theater history Laura Cull turns to the avant-garde theater of the 1960s and 70s. This was a time of lively discussions around creative hierarchy and the relationship between the group and the individual, and the concept of immanence was mainly used as a tool to deconstruct and question the prevailing circumstances under which collective creations were made regarding the influence and power of the members of the group. Cull, in commenting on the Living Theater and their work, says: “the Living Theater experimented with a range of de-individualized strategies with a specific focus on finding ways to bypass the operations of conscious intention. In this way, we might insist that their critique of the individual and their interest in collective creation were not simply based on a notion of the self-present subject” (Cull 2012, 35). The term *de-individualized* is retrieved from Michele Foucault and inserted by Cull to reflect on “how the group conceives and assembles its constituent parts” (Cull 2012, 34). Consequently this leads to the inevitable friction that occurs when the desires of the individual (performer) are placed in a collective expression. This view allows us to think about Staffan’s dilemma of feeling stuck as an incapability to engage in and rest in the notion of immanence as a force that is everywhere, regardless of him and his own individual investment in its progression. In this instance the power of his consciousness could possibly be regarded as a transcendent factor distracting him from moving: “Were it not for consciousness, the transcendental field would be defined as a pure plane of immanence, because it eludes all transcendence of the subject and of the object” (Deleuze 2005, 26).

## Immanence and The Shifting of Roles

Shedding light on Staffan’s predicament – his fear and confusion – is also partly done to illuminate the problems emerging from what I have described as the shifting of roles that the immanent collective process demands from its players. Inventing, building, making new, finding solutions to unexpected situations, were the performers main tasks. I suggest that a major reason for increased vulnerability and insecurities when approaching this challenge can be ascribed to the fact that the making of theater, and music and dance – as well as the prevailing educational focus of each discipline – is to such a large extent built on conventional hierarchical structures, while the decisions taken within the group are most often done with a collaborative consensus attitude. When this is the case the ability and readiness to develop individual esthetic choices is understimulated. In view of the structural demands that many compositions by Cage present to its performers – equally relevant to the performances we are talking about – Clarkson says: “Though the tactics of his experimental pieces vary greatly, the overall strategy remains consistent, namely, to set in motion processes that engage the musical imagination of the performer. The success of a performance depends on finding musicians who are willing to put not only their abilities as performers on the line, but their imaginative and spiritual capacities as well” (Bernstein and Hatch 2001, 72). An obvious but necessary first observation on our way to disentangle this nexus around creative responsibility and its definition and use in this apparatus, is that creative responsibility, as we have concluded earlier regarding improvisation, is crucial in *all* performative artistic formats. Actually, the demands formulated by Clarkson above would probably seem obvious to any contemporary actor working within the western tradition. However, there are a number of levels on which creative responsibility within theater, dance and music can be discussed, and therefore it is important to be somewhat precise. Further complications transpire from the fact that the history and practice of the different practitioners – actors, dancers, musicians – vary, and there are variations and differences in the actual language that has been used when discussing individual performer activity and responsibility within the different groups. In the text *Hierarchy in Creation; Description of the performance of vorschläge*, I look closely at the practice of musicians and their relationship to creative responsibility, and in the text *Differentiated Presence; Description of the performance of Ryoanji – A Meeting*, the dancers’ relation to creative responsibility was reflected upon, though in a slightly different way. We will therefore mainly focus on the actors and their relation to creative responsibility.

An exposition of the development of the actor’s practice throughout modern history of western theater cannot be rendered here. But, to find points of differentiation it is useful to look briefly at how, and along which lines, the concept of the ”creative performer” have advanced, and this is done, which must be emphasized, *only with the intention to offer a reference that helps separate the nature of the processes in the performances that we are looking at, from collective processes built around other types of material and other types of concepts*. Which is to say, that these examples are not methodologies that were used in the creative processes, and they are not descriptive of the performer’s creative approach (even if they should be considered a common knowledge base). Therefore one could say that the following overview is only connected to the creative processes that we are looking at as a countermand.

The two influential theater artists, Russian actor/director Konstantin Stanislawski (1863-1938) and German writer and theater theorist Berthold Brecht (1898-1956) are chosen here as points of departure since their thinking and theories propose methods that more or less consciously and actively assert an influence on actors’ creative responsibility, even in practices that formulate other methodological trajectories. In their work and in their writings, even though in many other respects worlds apart, Stanislawski and Brecht shared an intense interest in the actor’s practice, questioning and developing methods around artistic decision-making, and insisting on the need for not only an activation of the actor’s individual judgment, but a relentless critical approach to their different choices. Stanislawski, firmly grounded in a naturalistic esthetic, had and still has, a strong influence on acting methodology, and in a wide variety of critical work that has emerged over the last fifty years, his ideas have been examined, utilized and expanded on. The core quality of an actor’s expression lies, according to Stanislawski, in the actor’s capability of finding an expressive truth, of finding the human being within the character portrayed and to find a natural flow in the activities on stage. His view on how the actor should reach this, needless to say, changed and developed over time. His initial methodological focus was on the actor’s emotions, on the capacity to imagine and tap into memory, to be conjured up and used as experiential references and transferred into the character that is portrayed. Stanislawski was convinced “that an actor’s past experience, his ‘emotion memory’,” was a means of achieving that symbolic relationship between the actor’s personality and the character” (Benedetti 1988, 174). It was about finding real emotions for the actor to use in the portrayal of the character being played. Based on the reading of Stanislawski’s book *Creating a Role* (1983), Shomit Mitter takes it even further when he finds that “Only by feeling something can actors be satisfied that they are intimate with it with a fullness that approaches the required condition of being that thing” (Mitter  1992, 10). If we put this in relation to the work of the actors working in the performance of *John and the Mushrooms*, the reach for an emotional grounding of the expressions and claim on the autonomy of the character were constant aims within each individual actor. This was not something that was emphasized in the direction, but instead can be thought of as embedded in two divergent, more or less visible, causes. The first, and less visible, is the strong influence that such an actor methodology still has on actor-training and thinking – even though deeply questioned and problematized by many contemporary views on acting methodologies – and therefore how it imposes a kind of inescapable influence on the actors’ way of working. The second cause is the fact that the conceptual setup implied that the actors’ expressional incentives grew from their understanding and shaping of the characters inscribed by the script. A further complication that emerged from this complex weaving of layers was the fact that the creative responsibility constantly shifted due to the improvisational demands, and therefore the shaping of the character could never, in any way, be disconnected from the demand/responsibility to create anew.<sup>151</sup> Stanislawski, as mentioned, continually reevaluated and extended his theories around acting and he came to shift his methodology from a focus on the psychological to a more physical one, suggesting that the actor’s point of entry into the psychology of a character was through physical action, saying that the “logic and coherence of physical actions, directed to a given end (What do I want and what do I do to get it?) results in a logical, coherent psychological life” (Benedetti 1982, 69).<sup>152</sup> And this, what we might call a phenomenological turn in the Stanislawskian methodology, became an extremely present tactic for the performers in all three of the performances that we are looking at, because the constitution of their emotional state so much depended on the invention of physical activity in the present moment of the performance and as such, came to build, and constitute, a “coherent psychological life” for the performative persona they aimed at establishing.

Brecht’s writing on actor methodology is not as extensive as Stanislawski’s, but in conjunction with his critical writing on theater esthetics in general, it made an important imprint on the issue of the actor’s creative responsibility. Brecht’s view on acting could be seen almost like a counterpoint to that of Stanislawski, but he made it perfectly clear that on some points he was inspired by – and aligned with – the thinking of Stanislawski; on the point of the artist’s responsibility to society and the social meaning of the actor’s craft, on the importance of an actor’s keen observation of reality as a means of finding true expression, and on the importance of thinking of the ensemble as collectively creating the impact of the performance (Brecht 1964, 236). An important initial observation to make, regarding Brecht’s view on the work of the actor, is that it is tightly conflated with his idea of the alienation (*verfremdung*) effect.<sup>153</sup> Brecht’s devoted development of the alienation effect, as an esthetic device in theater making, came from the idea that a “representation that alienates is one which allows us to recognize its subject, but at the same time makes it seem unfamiliar” (Brecht 1964, 192). And the desired outcome of this effect is to infuse reflection and to make us look at things with new eyes, which “implies the antecedence of a general familiarity, of a habit which prevents us from really looking at things, a kind of perceptual numbness” (Jameson 1998, 39). Just like all illusion, the idea that the performance is anything else then just that – an artificial creation – should be avoided; the actor should incorporate a reflective awareness into the style of acting. The actor’s task – i.e. the creative responsibility – is to find a balance between a clear and complete presence in the activities *without* being transformed into the character he portrays, which could possibly cause the undesired effect of putting “his audience into a trance” (Brecht 1964, 193), and a reflective, somehow distanced quality in the expression. Brecht invented the technical term “fixing the ‘not…but”’ for the acting procedure. This term is used to signify a split in the actor’s concentration, so that when he “appears on stage, besides what he actually is doing he will at all essential points discover, specify, imply what he is not doing; that is to say he will act in such a way that the alternative emerges as clearly as possible, that his acting allows the other possibilities to be inferred and only represents one out of the possible variants. … In this way every sentence and every gesture signifies a decision; the character remains under observation and is tested” (Brecht 1964, 137).<sup>154</sup> The distance and the reflective quality within the performative moment, desired within a Brechtian methodology, was not something that was actively discussed within the different esthetic discourses underlying the performances that we are looking at, but with that said, it should be noted that a related kind of awareness did emerge through our focus on questions about relations, connectivity and meaning. In other words, the multilayered compositional structure in which the production of affect grew from superimpositions and synergies, and the split in actor/dancer concentration regarding the impact of the individual expression in relation to the whole, was constantly present, and it produced a vibrant awareness of the importance to weigh each expressive activity in relation to the other movements. Another factor, in line with Brecht’s thinking, that infused an actor-gaze, was the closeness to the audience, and the possibility to direct the focus of the expression towards a limited section of viewers, which allowed for a heightened understanding of the reciprocality of the expression.

One of the followers of the methodologies and esthetics of Stanislawski (and in certain aspects, also of Brecht), reasonable to mention here in regards to the historical undercurrent within the study of the actors’ practice, is the Polish theater artist Jerzy Grotowski (1933-1999). Grotowski developed an acting methodology that, to a large extent, prepared the foundation for contemporary physical theater through an expansion and deepening of the actors’ creative responsibility. Grotowski, like Stanislawski, focused intensely on the importance of the actor’s expressive truth and awareness of presence, but he intensified the need for each individual actor to reach what he called “self-revelation” and underscored the importance of articulating this process. In the Grotowski acting methodology, the actor’s physical work with his/her body was crucial for achieving a bare, true expression of the here and now. He was convinced that expressiveness can only be found through a thorough investigation of the body, its limitations and capacities. An extensive research into a variety of vocal and bodily exercises was developed and implemented so that the actor would “be able to decipher all the problems of his body which are accessible to him” (Grotowski 1968, 35). To put this into a Swedish context, the director Ingemar Lind (1945-1997) represents a theater artist who for many years comprehensively investigated, together with his group Institutet för Scenkonst, actor questions of this type. What’s interesting about the work and thinking of Lind is that he encourages the creative invention of the actor to stay open to what he calls the “social situation” which forces the actor to see constant change as part of the “material” of the actor (Lind 2003).<sup>155</sup> The depth and thoroughness that signifies the Grotowski method, in regards to the intense focus on bodily training/expression and “self-revelation” were not qualities that were searched for or explicitly noticeable in our performances. But, since the material and concepts to such a large degree demanded expressive invention, the use of the body and its “truth” inevitably became an important aspect of actor/dancer creative responsibility, an aspect enhanced by the strong presence – the here and now – of musical movements, colors and rhythms.

What lies in the forefront – or maybe rather as a strong substrate – in the work, thinking and theories of Stanislawski, Brecht and Grotowski is the notion that the vitality and strength of theater is dependent on the quality of actor performance and, what is most relevant to the reasoning that I am trying to carve out in this apparatus, is that the actor who has to do the work, who has to activate his/her awareness and creativity in order to shape the individual expression. There is no way around the necessity for the actor to, not only evoke, but also expand his/her capability to take responsibility in order for this to happen. And the quality, in its core, does not depend on an outward performative quality but on an inward expressive truth; to be found, weighed and shaped by the individual performer.<sup>156</sup>

As a means to fast forward this overview to a place in modern theater history that certainly had a pivotal effect on the notion of creative responsibility in collective creation – the late 1960s and 70s – it is useful to make the observation that not only do the above examples epitomize the domination of a male gaze in the modern history of western theatre, but also, in the way their methodologies are formulated, they uphold and validate the dependence on a hierarchical setup where an external authority is the judge and evaluator of success or failure. The actor is creatively responsible for shaping his/her individual expression, but there is a constantly present outside force, that represents the overarching responsibility for the compositional aspects and the dramaturgical consequences of the individual choices. This can certainly be experienced as a contradiction that is maybe hard to stomach, and the evolvement of the group theaters that grew out of the political turbulence of the 1960s and 70s, should be regarded as a reaction against this.  

In their attempt to trace the motivations behind the theatrical creations of the 1960s and 70s, Kathryn Mederos Syssoyeva and Scott Proudfit in their book *A History of Collective Creation* (2013), observe that the creative seeds for the extensive questioning of and experimentation with theatrical forms, methods and expressions can be found in artistic movements happening long before the turbulence of 1968. From their predominately North American perspective, they mention Erwin Piscator who was teaching at The New School for Social Research in New York City in the mid 1940s and who came to influence many theater artists, among them Judith Molina, who recalls the energy of that time: “We were mowing towards the spirit of ’68, still 20 years ahead of us, just as the socialist revolutions of which Piscator spoke were 20 years behind us” (Syssoyeva and Proufit, 2013a, 115). The esthetic experimentations, exemplified by the work of John Cage and Allan Kaprow, grew side by side with the founding of a number of experimental theaters. The Living Theatre, to give one example, searched for new and nonhierarchical methods to create theater. However, it is reasonable to say that it was the political and social turbulence of the late 1960s that set off a more precise and focused criticism of prevalent structures within theater making. And thereby, the birth of collective creation, as a term signifying opposition to existing hierarchical structures, can be said to have an ideological source. The questioning and rejection of the different roles in a traditional production situation, like the role of the producer, the playwright, and the director, was at the core of the critical shift, a shift that aimed to replace these figures of authority with collective labor and collective creativity. Consequently the question of creative responsibility, which is what we are trying to locate, became the central issue of the intense reconfigurations enveloped during this time. The responsibility for the artistic expression of the performance was removed from an individual authority, and placed on the shoulders of the collective. The complex dynamic of shared creative responsibility and the contradictions and ambiguities that a collective process entails, are obviously grand and would be a rich topic in itself. Though, we will rest in the observation that, generally speaking, the outlook and importance placed on exploring individual creativity within collective processes, radically changed during the late 1960s and 70s in a way that, one could say, sowed the seeds for how actor responsibility in collective creation is viewed today.

There are two factors, in the productions we are looking at, regarding the demands on the performers, that most clearly differentiate them from the types of creative responsibility that we have located in the above. The first, which mainly relates to the methods of Stanislawski, Brecht and Grotowski, is that there is no outside reference judging, adjusting and commenting on the actors’ choices. Secondly, the performances are not fixed; the collective process has no goal to create a predetermined form and expression This is in contrast to how the notion of collective creation – both in the theater movements of the 1960s and 70s as well as in more contemporary collaborative practices, like divising – principally should be “understood as a series of challenges to the traditional authorities within theatre’s creative process” (Syssoyeva, Proudfit, 2013a, 125). Hence, it is clearly a reaction to the hierarchical and hegemonic structures of their own theatrical traditions, but not, notably, a reaction to the idea of the fixed artifact. This can be exemplified by Laura Cull’s description of the collaborative process of The Living Theatre (in relation to *Mysteries and Smaller Pieces*, 1964, and *Paradise Now*, 1968) when she says that, “the company allows order to emerge from the bottom up. … Rather than allowing an individual to coordinate and command the process of creating a performance from the ’outside,’ The Living Theatre engaged in lengthy group discussions as the primary method for generating, developing, and organizing new performance material” (Syssoyeva and Proufit, 2013a, 133). Cull continues by pointing out that “no matter how fully a company might embrace the idea that they cannot, and do not want to, occupy a God’s-eye view outside their creative process – they must inevitably arrive at a point in that process where they must at least *stage* an occupation of such a position in order to edit and organize their material, arrive at a ‘finished’ work, and perform the ‘same’ show more than once?” (Syssoyeva and Proufit 2013a, 134).  From this, we can understand that even if the creative responsibility is distributed among the members of the collective, a certain “order” is aimed for (we do not know what this order refers to: compositional, dramaturgical, narrative?) and the group discussions are directed towards “organizing” the material, with the goal to create a predetermined form and expression. When looking at this example of a collective creative process – which to a large extent mirrors how collective creation is also approached today - one can discern that the egalitarian quality that it purports is about the process *leading up to a performance*, not the performance itself. Consequently, the distinct difference between creative situations and creative responsibility is not to be found in the presence (and use) of a certain variable factor, for example improvisation, but rather exactly where this variability is placed in terms of process and performance. In the immanent creative processes that we are looking at, set in motion during time shared with the audience, the creative responsibility for the performers was to make instantaneous compositional decisions. This differentiation requires, for reasons of clarification, that we put aside the term *collective creation* in favor of the term *instant collective composition*.<sup>157</sup>  

The improvisational shaping of the individual expressive matter is the activity which demands taking responsibility on that particular level, but then, a keen awareness of and sense of responsibility for its combined effect in the present moment, is also required. It is this latter level that calls for the use of the term instant collective composition, which in turn envelops the term shifting of role.  To put this creative dynamic in perspective we can compare it with the Black Mountain performance *Untitled Event*, mentioned in the foreword. From comments made by the participating artists, we know that each artist had separately prepared an activity that was then performed during shared time, creating an expressional structure of superimpositions. Experienced artists with different practices took responsibility for preparing and shaping their expressive matter before the actual event, and during the actual performance the adjustments of the expressive matter happened mainly on a subconscious level. Merce Cunningham had this to say about the performance process: “nor was I to have anything to do with what anybody else was doing necessarily” (Fetterman 1996, 102). This is different from how I, in the rehearsal processes of *John and the Mushrooms* and *Ryoani – A Meeting*, focused on the question of how to listen, adjust and calibrate the individual expression in relation to the others. That focus was intended to produce an understanding for the need of each performer to extend their awareness beyond the challenge of shaping their individual expression, to relational aspects in compositional thinking, and this is what I choose to see as a shift in the role of the performer; from being creatively responsible for the individual expressive matter to – instantaneously and without any process of negotiation with the other participants – being forced to take responsibility for weighing its effect in and on the expression as a whole.<sup>158</sup> It is therefore essential to understand that the concept of the *shifting of roles* refers to the discrete moment of performing and not to the process of creating the performance, but to the very moment of performing it. This is what differentiates the concept of *shifting of roles* from the type of changing of roles that comes with methods like “devising,” “collaborative creation” or “theater improvisation” in which the traditional roles and hierarchical structures are shifted by, for example, the actor also functioning as author, the musician as actor, the actor taking on responsibility for the direction and so on.<sup>159</sup>  

To activate the compositional judgment of the performers does not only place the ability – compositional as well as expressional – of each individual in focus, but also highlights the question of intent. Intentionality is inevitably relational, and its definition is linked to phenomena and dynamics both within the discrete realm of the (art) piece as well as to the outside world. So, if the intention behind a performance derives from the choices and initiatives taken by the director, producer – and on a certain level, cultural politics – it is then extended, or countered, by the intention of each of the performers involved. This latter level of intention, tied to the choices and expressions of each individual, is commented on by Clarkson in the framework of Cage’s esthetics: “The individual for Cage and Tudor is someone whose actions arise not only from the ego-system, but also from the guiding center of the personality, the source of ethical impulses that link the individual to society” (Clarkson in Bernstein and Hatch, 2001, 74). In order to activate – and somewhat synchronize this demand for a personal intent with the overall intent of the event as a whole – it is important to infuse an awareness in each individual involved of: why this is happening in the way it is happening. The shifting of roles consequently produces a need not only to compose, but also to understand “why I compose.” The challenge of this was commented on by the actor Mauritz: “That was something that we realized, kind of collectively one time when we had played a performance where a lot of sounds and activities were going on at the same time, everybody was just doing a lot of things. And after that we talked about how the whole performance is so much about listening. It just felt so great to be reminded of that overall perspective, that the performance is about listening.” The aspect of intention, within the framework of the performances, was further complicated by the fact that they, to a certain extent, wanted to be non-intentional. This ambition was fueled by Cage who said: “What I would like to find is an improvisation that is not descriptive of the performer, but is descriptive of what happens, and which is characterized by an absence of intention. It is at the point of spontaneity that the performer is most apt to have recourse to his memory. He is not apt to make a discovery spontaneously. I want to find ways of discovering something you don’t know at the time that you improvise – that is to say, the same time you’re doing something that’s not written down, or decided upon ahead of time” (Kostelanetz 1987, 222).

It is of course necessary to understand the term – and process – of *shifting of roles*, in this context, as relative. Each performer involved in the different performances saw themselves as an artist in their own right, continuously making choices and activating their artistic judgment and sensitivity in their specific practice. But since the concepts were dependent on an investigative attitude that, to a large extent, was brought into the performances, it meant that parts of the struggle with one’s own individual art practice were disclosed. It could then be said that an immanent process allows one to investigate the unfamiliar, plus, functions as a way into an understanding of how our shortcomings can become a resource and part of the expression. In the case of the musicians working with the production of *vorschläge* by Matthias Spahlinger, it is possible to claim that the shifting of roles meant something different than for the actors and dancers, since the musicians felt less stressed and insecure around the fact that they had to improvise and invent their own expression. For them, instead, it was the demand to – in a collective immanent process – reflect, analyze and verbally discuss how to read and understand Spahlinger’s instructions. This was a shift from “just” reading and playing a score to actually talking and thinking about what they should play and why.

For the performer, the challenges emanating from an immanent process are, as we slowly come to understand, manifold. Not only is there a need t create expressions using compositional judgment but also to encompass the position of each expressional activity in relation to the overall esthetics and intent. In the preparation process for both of the productions *John and the Mushrooms*, and *Ryoanji – A Meeting*, this challenge was met by activating the thinking and awareness around the relational and perceptual aspects in and of the performances, but also by emphasizing that each character/person on stage should be seen as an individual with a strong artistic practice.<sup>160</sup> The shifting of roles, from that aspect, meant viewing the expressional force as an individual activity rather than collectively, which obviously – and inevitably – caused friction when coming together to create something. The capability to nourish this dynamic is related to the ability to experience the vitality in difference and to open up the senses to the wholeness of diversity and multiplicity. Linkages between apparently colliding forces and expressions need to be enjoyed, as well as acknowledged, and this demand actualizes the question: What is it that I, as a performer, participate in? When reflecting on, and critically treating the notion of performance participation, an obvious picture that might turn up is the exchange that happens in the space as a whole, encapsulating everyone, performers and audience alike. Though, as we at this point are looking at the dynamics of instant collective composition within an immanent process from a performer perspective, we will need to temporarily exclude the gaze that incorporates the audience, and stay within the creative dynamics of the different ensembles.<sup>161</sup> It is helpful however, to keep in mind that the concepts that are used to illuminate participation within the ensembles are transferable to the level of the whole event, hence not only building a bridge between the two but also indicating how tightly conflated they are and mutually influenced.

# Immanence and Performing Participation

The notion of participation refers to the performer’s individual and subjective experience of partaking in the relations to the surrounding elements. Therefore the resemblance to the previous discussion on relations is obvious. Though, the gaze in the treatment above on the differentiation between expressive matter, its consistency, relations and consolidation found its bearing in the notion of relations of non-relations. This fact can be used as a dividing factor since participation cannot be constituted by its opposite in the same way; claiming participation through non-participation. This distinct difference places the above discussion on the relations between expressive matter within a discourse of composition and dramaturgy and the discussion on performer participation within, what might be labeled, a socio-esthetic field. To further demarcate the area of discussion we can ask: Participation in what? In the following, the suggested answer to that question is – the *whole*. This term is certainly complex, both on a philosophical level and from a perception psychology perspective, but the exposition of the participatory aspect is not an attempt to locate this term in a philosophical discourse or in cognitive theory, but instead in the actual doings of the performers. With that said it is useful to keep in mind that processual thinking to a large degree is concerned with the aspects of interrelatedness, multiplicity and the notion that all togetherness is signified by difference. However, what we will see in the following is that the notion of the whole is used to signify the experience of being together in an expressive form and the energies and feelings that appear around such phenomena as connectivity and inclusion.

The affective nature of being in an immanent creative process is of being in a new form, unfamiliar and as such, fragile. The first instinct is to reach for recognizable signs of relations and participation; a search for a sense of being a part - of the whole. But what is the whole in this context? What is its nature? Is it stable? Is it something that everybody (in the ensemble) agrees on? I want to suggest that this whole is something recognizable either as an affective sequence in the world outside the performative situation, or as an established and normative esthetic matrix. Juxtaposing the organizing instinct and desire to be in the whole with an immanent creative collective process subsequently creates friction since it continuously produces new forms and new combinations that cannot be immediately recognized. The actor Staffan Göthe, in the performance of *John and the Mushrooms*, made a comment that conveys how this friction set off a collective effort to understand and comply with the inevitable flux of the whole: “We [the ensemble] talked a lot about the idea that even if each piece of the material, every part, was known to us, one could be extra sensitive to the fact that the actual combination had never before occurred, was totally new. I think it was through those discussions, and this way of thinking that we retrieved the luster in the performance.” This is an example of how the ensemble of *John and the Mushrooms* gathers after a performance to talk about it.<sup>162</sup> In other words, the “disorganization” that ensued from the immanent process in the ensemble during the performance is somehow structured, on an emotional level, through a conjunctive immanent process on a social level (a discussion of a critical esthetic nature). It is as if the unfamiliar, that they themselves create, had to be confirmed as something valuable from outside its existence in order to become endurable. Which in turn becomes a confirmative process that actually creates a chain of meta-levels, as this discussion around the challenge to fully engage in what is unfamiliar, is something that is explicitly talked about between the characters in the performance: Kom ihåg - nedanstående som lista, typ? Se manus!
		MERCE
Nooo, I think I think or … What becomes of all that is happening, together, at the same time? I wonder. Does it work?
		YOKO
Yes! I do my thing and you do your thing and it becomes together.
		MERCE
Become together? Is that together, what I do and what you do. Differ together?
		YOKO
Yes, at the same time here, nowhere else, then it becomes like that. I do and you do and we live in it. I cannot differ, I am I, but want together.  		
							(Petri 2011, 9)					
The impetus behind the desire for participation in the whole of the expression can be seen as an organizing instinct that the non-narrative and non-representative esthetic provokes. The immanent process can therefore be said to be – partly – influenced by insecurities and desires for organization and balance of an affirmative kind. However, this observation does not make the immanent process transcendent (the transcendent force thus being norms and conventions) but confuses the borders of the two polarities. The search for a confirmation of the status of the new and unfamiliar, as exposed in the exchange between the performers, is not the pendulum movement between the two forces that all interpretative activity entails, like the listening and communicative process within a string quartet playing written music, but instead it is a movement of an esthetic and psychodynamic nature. Taken one step further, the movement towards the whole can be seen as a social formation, indicating the tendency that each individual intuitively adjusts his or her expression to correspond to what might be described as either a norm of social behavior (rhythm and interplay, dynamic responses of listening and speaking) or compositional preexisting conventions. This tendency can possibly be regarded – and problematized – as a transcendent influence. When working with the Mathias Spahlinger’s composition *vorschläge*, where discussions and the exchange of views among the musicians were part of the performance, this became clear: Kom ihåg - nedanstående som lista, typ som ovan.
	DAVID
But, do you think that this discussion should lead to that we decide what we are going to play, or … no.
	EVA
I just feel a real urge to try something.			
They all laugh, except David
	DAVID
The goal for me is to, somehow … that we should find a kind of collective… that what I play doesn’t overtake in any way, I mean that I try to subordinate myself, and play something that doesn’t kind of go against too much …
	EVA
Because we probably have …
	DAVID
…what the others do.
	EVA
… six very different ideas about what we eventually are going to play, what kind of sound, music.

The implication in this exchange is that to become a part of the whole, the individual expression has to be adjusted - adjustments made along the way towards the collective creation; considerations and awareness to the unfolding of the immanent process. The impetus behind this is the aspiration for collective authorship, which presumably will create a sense of a whole. The collective process is therefore influenced by the preconception of how the collective expression - in relation to already existing esthetics – should be shaped. But the example given, of the exchange between David and Eva in their work with *vorschläge*, also illustrates that the group was anxious to find consensus outside their performance practice by intuitively developing a socio-metric pattern towards consensus and inclusion, thereby mirroring the joint compositional effort in the music making. Both of these levels of awareness can be seen as conscious calibrations towards preexisting definitions – and experiences – of the whole.

Is then the notion of performing the whole inevitably tied to modes and qualities already known, to an idea of what it is – before – it has occurred? The complex substrate of an indeterminate immanent collective creative process, we come to see, encompasses quite a few contradictions and fields of friction of this kind, but these fields cannot be regarded as obstructions. They are information. They are real, in so far as they consist of emotions, ambitions and desires within each individual involved. The reflections above connote that an immanent process within collective creation can be disrupted, even stopped in its flow, and that the exchange of stimuli and response between the performers is composed of certain specific qualities. Of course this cannot be a constructive and valid stance. Instead it is necessary to affirm that *every* action and reaction is a part of the immanent process: within the performance, as well as in the world, as a whole. The intrusive nature of such a view is commented on by Laura Cull when she says that the “immanent/transcendent dyad cannot simply be mapped onto specific instances of performance, allowing us to separate the bottom-up from the top-down, the good from the bad. Indeed we have noted that this very gesture would be a kind of transcendence in itself, an application of pre-existing concepts onto performance as if it were a passive and pliant example” (Cull 2012, 55). So, to what extent can the desire to establish participation through relations of a more recognizable nature within the performances, be seen as a stratifying energy: As a way to avoid a feeling of isolation and vulnerability that might grow from being inside an immanent and indeterminate process? A vulnerability that stems from the notion that we will “never feel grounded when immanence is the starting point for our thinking” (Cull 2012, 9).

# There is an initiative taken – Immanence and Hierarchy

>You can always start wherever. I don’t think what I decide is better than what you decide and I don’t think what you decide is better than what Yoko decides and I don’t think what Yoko decides is better than what David decides and I don’t think what David decides is better than what Rose decides. I think that everything can be there at the same time and I think that everything can be silent. 							
>Johan Petri

An initiative must be taken for an activity to ensue. In the case of the three performances we are looking at, I took the initiative. The role of the director could therefore, be said to be preceded by the role of initiator. Though, that is not an accurate description of my roles – first initiator followed by director – rather, as we shall see, these two roles are closely intertwined and there is a shifting dynamic between the two. And it is this dynamic that actually constitutes the core friction and main source for these reflections. Why is that? Well, the initiator is setting the activity in motion by creating the circumstances under which the collective activities are possible to take place. The intent of the initiator, as such, is not to steer the expressive quality of the performance but “just” to create the possibility for it to happen. The director, on the other hand, engages in shaping the expression (of each performer as well as the performance as a whole). All three concepts, on which the performances were based, were created to decrease the need and impact of the director, redirecting this role towards the role of the initiator. Whichever of these two roles we choose to look at, and in whatever way we choose to define them, they both constitute power over significant aspects of the collaborative process, and the question of hierarchy is certainly present and in play.

Mathias Spahlinger, in his foreword to the composition *vorschläge*, says that “those game-rules are the best (and also most difficult to formulate) that already from the start are open, that demand or presume its own reflection, that comprise its own determination, its fluidity, its own abounding. game-rules for music – irrespectively if determined by the composer (as a plan) or if developed collaboratively from, or not from, a plan of some sort – should not be oriented towards result, should not have anything of a  strictly commanding decree, but instead in each and every moment of its performance available for disposal. the rule should be influenceable, changeable, yes possible to eliminate, even when its validity is defined it should be possible to infringe; it will show that a determined infringement of the game-rules will bring more truth into the light than any rule ever will accomplish. or: other, not predetermined definitions of game-rules will ensue only by experimentation or ad-hoc decisions, that on the other hand – beneficiary to the entirety – is possible or desirable to disagree with and oppose to. what this music propose, express, is, is decided by those who perform it, each and every one of them (Spahlinger 1993). Here, Spahlinger not only questions his own role as decision maker but he instigates a flux in the flow of communication between the performers and lays the ground for changing how the expressive musical form emerges; as coming from somewhere else – maybe – than from the composer’s instruction. He encourages the musician who opposes the instructions of the composer, the musician who moves beyond the suggestion of the score and activates his or her own sensitivity and judgment. The main incentive behind Spahlinger’s formulations - and the act of creating the composition (*vorschläge*) - is to offer a stage, or a circumstance, from which the different levels of hierarchy involved in a process of interpretation, as it has been shaped by western music history, can be criticized and explored. But it also connects to what Cage says when he claims that  ”I don’t hear it as I write it.” which he elaborates on by saying that he wants to experience something that he cannot imagine (Retallack 1996, 184). Spahlinger expresses something similar: ”i have let myself be guided by some deliberations i would like to bring up with the intention to insert them into the discussion and thereby clarify that my suggestions not always satisfy my own demands” (Spahlinger 1993). The construct of the Spahlinger concept is then what Deleuze would call a precise operation that deducts an element of power, but is not a negative operation (as both Cage’s and Spahlinger’s comments point to) because it already enlists and releases positive processes (Murray 1997).

In the same way as Spahlinger does, when he questions his role and authority as composer in the foreword, the concepts of the performances we are talking about are also built to consciously undermine such hierarchies. Though, the nature of the creative situation in the performances is not characterized by an absence of transcendent factors (that on a certain level disqualifies it as immanent) but is steered by an organizational principle, an open but still compositional structure. The control over this structure – the choice of material and its placement on a durational sequence, is in my hands as initiator/director. As repeatedly pointed out, the use of unpredictable chance operated procedures within these structures reduces the director’s control (in some major parts, it is fully truncated from pivotal artistic decisions), but the structure is still a transcendent force, even if it does not have a direct and precise relation to that which is invented/developed/expressed. Did this power over certain aspect of the process inflict on the performers creativity? If so, how and in what way?

We might need to be reminded again of the specific circumstances – the rules of the game – that the performances were based on. Just like in the Spahlinger composition, the starting point for the performers was different kinds of instructions: textual instructions to be used for creating music, instructions for an action to be made or instructions in the form of a poem or a fictional text to be performed in some way. The instructions found their value only through the individual performer’s improvisational expressive action or reflective response. According to the rules of the game these expressions and/or responses were controlled by the performer and could not be judged or adjusted. This was mainly because the quality of the performances lay in the instantly invented expression of the performer and any directorial comment or even suggestion would subsequently contradict and counter act the need and demand on the performer to fully rely on his/her own responsibility and capability to shape the expression. When formulating his own stance and esthetics in regard to this aspect of performer responsibility Cage says: “The position should not stay – in the case of music – should not stay with the composer once he’s written something. It should move over to the next person who deals with it, and that person – the performer – should become responsible, and responsible to himself or herself, rather than to the composer” (Retallack 1996, 293). In addition to the fact that the expression in the discrete moment of performance (or rehearsal) could not be adjusted or shaped by the director, the openings for directorial intervention were circumscribed by the use of chance operations and the indeterminate mode that this produced. The first field of tension within the concepts of the performances in this polarity of dominance and subordination is clear-cut: The initiator – who is also the director – facilitates the situation where the performer is demanded to activate and use her/his creativity to express something of her own in order for the performance to come into being. In other words, the director controls whether the performer is going to be able to express herself, by creating – or not – the situation in which the improvisation can take place.<sup>164</sup> The performer on the other hand controls the expressive quality. Though, this is not fully true as the initiator/director/ composer has the power over *which* instructions there are to choose from (or that the chance operations pull out), hence deciding and creating what material to be used in the immanent creative process. But does this level of directorial power over the material – inevitably followed by restrictions – conflict with the immanent process? How does this intricate weave that determines how the power is allocated within the collective creative process effect aspects like creative freedom, the sense of control over the expression, the role and function of the director, and the communicative relationship between the performer and director? These questions can only be met by reflecting on what frictions and problems they exert in the collaborative creative situation.

As the proprietor of power over the artistic decisions shifts between the different parts in the collective creation, the directorial challenge is to infuse an awareness of how these shifts alter the demands in respect to creative responsibility. But, as important, is to find a way to establish a level of security in each performer, in the parts where they invent and are in control. The circumstances under which the performers could gain strength to oppose the power of the director/composer varied in the different performances. The members of the ensemble in *John and the Mushrooms* did work as a group, but as the concept encouraged them to stay within their individual sensitivity, their possible objections to the instructions in the script, formulated and inserted by me, were somewhat decreased as this individualization reduced the strength of their opposition. This aspect of opposition within the ensemble working with the composition/performance of *vorschläge* was different, as the concept of the performance allowed them to synchronize their emotions and opinions into a joint force. In the movement called *Empathy* Spahlinger instructs the players by saying “ the first sound is brought forth with as little intention as possible (no acting or expressive self-assertion).” Throughout the whole discussion process, this demand to approach their music making without intention provoked the ensemble in different ways and a bit into the work there was this exchange:   Kom ihåg - nedan som lista typ!
	ANNA
He clearly contradicts himself here, at one point in the text, when he says that one should feel and try “…to determine from what intention, posture, state of mind, bodily tension, the sound has been brought forth (this may be consciously or not for the first player).”  Well, if there is consciousness there is also intention.
	DAVID
It is probably formulated like that just so that we will react to it.
	EVA
The text is maybe written just to provoke us. But guys, hallo, we don’t go along with this!

The power over the artistic decisions is never contained in one place, and in this respect no clear division can be asserted between the different parts of the performances, even if the power *formally* is allocated to one particular position. They continuously overlap and effect each other. This is about contamination: the parts where the performer has the power to, not only shape the expression but also choose what to express, are easily contaminated by the hierarchy in the parts in which the performer does not exert control to the same extent. I suggest that there are two energies that lie behind this problem. The first is about unspoken expectations, about energies and different levels of status prevailing in the collaborative situation, irrespectively of where the power is placed at the moment of creation. The actor Staffan Göthe comments on this in our conversation: “but you know I could feel that there was something problematic with, and maybe I just imagine this, that ‘Johan has such an incredibly close relationship to Cage that I can’t really do my thing … ‘, do you understand? I felt that it was difficult to take it in my own direction. JP: So you felt trapped in my imagination as it occurred in your imagination? SG: Yes, as if the main reason was for me to satisfy that.” The power that the director exerts in a process can thus, unintentionally, be authoritarian. It is probably reasonable to say that such an impact often works on levels concerning expectations and what’s left unspoken. To nourish an immanent process this kind of given-power is something that the performer needs to be encouraged to break loose from since it obviously gets in the way of listening to and being aware of the signals and impulses moving through the ensemble.<sup>165</sup> The unintentional authoritarian impact was assumedly amplified by the emission of directorial responses, which produced a vague and sometimes complicated notion of where the power lay.

In addition to the disruption on the creative process that emanated from the unintentional authority engraved in the hierarchical structures, there were other forces within the ensemble that further complicated the question of power and how it was allocated when creating the individual actor expression in the immanent process. The actor Staffan Göthe went on to explain: “and also that I in some strange way felt inhibited, like when Kristine and Anna very early in the process threw themselves in there and just played. Also Jessica could be totally uninhibited and shout and scream and run around, do things, and I couldn’t… it was really unpleasant that I wanted to do something but felt inhibited or embarrassed or something, so there was a kind of struggle to manage to do what I desired.”  What we can understand from this is that even if the power over the expression formally is allocated to different positions in the collective, structures of hierarchy still prevail. This is partly, as I said, because these structures are ingrained in the traditional way of making theatre, but also what could be described as the hierarchy of expressions. The question then is if it is possible to view these sub-forces as disturbances on the immanent process? Since immanence as a perpetual movement is unimpressionable, the answer is no. But still, as immanence in this framework is viewed as a sequence of exchange where stimuli and expressive responses create a building from within, it is reasonable to say that these hidden hierarchies inflict on the creative process of the performer and somehow deprive him/her of the power to contribute. I leave open the question of how to prevent and meet these structural problems, as it goes deep into aspects of prevailing cultural/political phenomena that are outside the realm of the collective creation, as well as, involve complex questions of a sociometric nature. But what I can say is that during the work with the different productions, we were forced to address these questions and their impact on the process. As the occurrence of disturbing factors was an undeniable and unavoidable fact, the question of hierarchy and power was dealt with on a micro level and addressed in relation to each discrete creative situation where the performer felt inhibited and confused. The general attitude then, was to strive for an increased awareness of what was going on and where the power lay, i.e. to illuminate both my own unintentional impact, as well as the individual performer’s responsibilities and possibilities.

In his text *One Less Manifesto* Deleuze addresses the question of hierarchy and power from a number of vantage points: the interventions of the director, the hierarchy of language, the hierarchy and power of what theater represents, as well as “the power of theater itself” (Murray 1997, 251). In other words, his reasoning goes beyond the nature of the creative process that is happening when making theater, honing the reasoning down to the very specific conditions under which an expression that is in *continuous variation* can occur. It is Deleuze’s point of focus and explicit opinion, that the distribution and dissolution of power, as exerted from the theatrical expression (as well as from the theater as an institution) can only happen when continuous variation is set in motion. If continuous variation then is the priority, the question of what means are needed to attain it, is subordinate. This is indicated by Laura Cull in her observation that if “a dominant director is needed to construct such a theater, then so be it, Deleuze seems to imply; whatever way works” (Cull 2012, 54). The correlation between this observation and the performances that we are looking at is obvious but intricate. The intention to create expressional movements in continuous variation is similar, but there is also the presence of a transcendent power (exerted by the concepts delineating the expressive matter and the aspect of duration). In other words: Hierarchy prevails. However, the specifics of how and at which points the hierarchical structures are under attack differ, as continuous variation, in the case of our performances, is a desired outcome but not something that is constructed/composed in a fixed sense. Instead it is an outcome of chance and indeterminacy.

# Immanence and the director  

The paradoxes that occur when juxtaposing the notion of unavoidable hierarchies with creative situations that are built on a process of immanence, chance operations and indeterminacy maybe become most charged when looking at the role of the director and its inherit transcendent status. The contradictions are as obvious as when Cage talks about “interpenetration and non-obstruction” or “purposeful purposelessness.” Clarkson suggests that an often-used way – by performers/directors – to tackle this contradictory dynamic is to “conclude that these formulations may be hoped for ideals but are unattainable in practice” (Bernstein and Hatch 2001, 71). Though, for me as a director, the interesting challenge is to allow and affirm the frictions and the charged polarities that are exposed through the collective creative process and the built-in paradoxes of the concepts, and to not give in to the idea that democracy in collective creative situations – as well as between expressions – is a hoped for ideal but unattainable in practice. Instead, I want to look at how the directorial interventions can take form. With that said, we have to start the reflections on the directorial task from the observation that just as the unfolding of an expression built on chance and indeterminacy escapes its initial origin, the expression of the performance escapes the control and impact of the director. No adjustments can be made, and no comments regarding the expressive quality can be voiced. Consequently, if chance is allowed, if immanence and indeterminacy is desired, if the artistic judgment of the individual performer is at the core of the expression, then the directorial interventions that are possible to make have to be of a specific type and on a specific level. The sensitivity and judgment that must be used in such a challenge is certainly tied to my subjectivity, but it also directly mirrors a directorial intention and is therefore connected to the question of artistic responsibility. How is that so? Well, to renounce the possibility to steer the separate parts of a performance, or even its combined expression, does not imply that the initiator(s) – the director, or if it is a collective – is deprived of the artistic responsibility. Instead, a different outlook is needed, an outlook that abandons the image of the performance as a carrier of one specific meaning, with the director (or the collective) as its author. The removal of my influence on the expressive outcome thus generates a shift in focus and a need to transform the question: What statement do I make by instigating the performance and what is my responsibility for its treatment, its message and ethics? And further, how do I take responsibility for making it possible for a certain type of experience to occur? The answer is to be found in taking responsibility for the formal structuring of the performative event, its relations and its energy, but not for the individual expressions. Performance studies scholar Erika Fisher-Lichte reflects on the position of the director in the type of experimental performances that, since the 1960s, have developed forms and methods to create performances with social and interactive qualities rather than purely esthetical. She says, “the job of the director lies in developing staging strategies which can establish appropriate conditions for this experiment” (Fisher-Lichte 2008, 40). This is a rather accurate description of my role as director in the productions that we are looking at.  Though, the difference is that the esthetic aspect – the choice of material, the design of the theatrical space, the conceptualization of the process, all which had an important impact on the esthetic experience – cannot be separated from the intention to shift the esthetic experience to a social one: they need to be thought of as closely intertwined and dependent on each other.

The removal of directorial responses that the concepts entailed clearly produced a vague, contradictory and complicated definition of my role as director. Hierarchy was present, no doubt, but blurred and therefore at certain moments created insecurity within the ensemble and in the individual performer, as confirmation and guidance were most often given on a structural level. This insecurity, inherit in the form, had to be met, from the start, by infusing an understanding and acceptance of the creative situation and its intention. In other words, the directorial task – more or less equal in the three productions – involved to a large degree activating and supporting the awareness of the perceptual intent on which the constructions of the concepts were built (see *Cage Interpreted and Performed*). Extended into the concrete work during rehearsals, this meant continuously reminding the performers how and why the concepts were formulated the way they were, as well as supporting them to trust the perspective of the expression as a whole, and to affirm its impact. In her reflections on the work of Goat Island, Laura Cull offers useful and relevant entrance points for looking at the function of the director when working with immanent processes: “But rather than presume that such evocations of outsideness necessarily involve transcendence, we might ask after the nature of the ‘outside’ being alluded to here, given that Hixon and other contemporary directors do not accord that position with any necessary privilege. What, if anything, is specific to Hixon’s relationship to the material? One response would be to suggest that this ‘outside’ is always a relative outside, and also one that enables *the preservation rather than homogenization of difference*  - as a kind of immanent or internal outside – within a process of collaborative authorship” (Cull 2012, 44). This relates directly to what I think is the directorial task when guiding the performers in a multilayered composition where expressions of different kinds are superimposed and the question of the hierarchy of expressions inevitably becomes necessary to address. “Preservation rather than homogenization of difference” in the context of our performances can be read and applied in parts – as well as in full – to analyze and describe my work as director. Preservation can be seen as the directorial task, to watch over the implementation of the conceptual rules and restrictions, since they are the foundation for the expression of the performance as a whole, and maintain a sense of security within the ensemble.<sup>166</sup> Homogenization can be used, disconnected from difference, only as a reminder that this process – of homogenization – is what’s most often strived for and expected from an audience point of view and, as such, something that can be regarded as a pre-condition. “Preservation rather than homogenization of difference” was, in the working process of *John and the Mushrooms*, most often talked about as anarchic harmony.<sup>167</sup> However, if the problems that occurred around the allocation of power and expressive responsibilities were mainly addressed directly in conjunction with a specific moment in the performative sequence, the challenges of being in anarchic harmony, handling the multitude of expressional levels, was instead met through a more general discussion but also with what could be described as a sort of training, instigated as a directorial measure. This training, aimed at increasing our awareness of nuances, of acknowledging the impact of smaller and softer expressions, even when surrounded by larger and more dominant ones. It also wanted to infuse an understanding of the richness to be found in juxtaposing different tempos, different dynamics and articulations, and to encourage the deconstruction of expressional competitiveness. In other words, training aimed at strengthening compositional thinking and awareness.

When the performer in *John and the Mushrooms* gets an instruction that says: “Write down three thoughts, cut them in pieces and give them away.” or one that says “Build something that doesn’t exist.” the actor activity can go in many directions and take on a large number of different expressive qualities. As there is no fixed and predetermined concept of what these activities might look like and the actor is in full command of the shaping of the expression, a directorial response had to be made in a way that did not exert a need for a mutual responsiveness. Instead it should support the actor to weigh other possibilities to shape the expression, as well as encourage an inward reflexive motion towards being in the present moment, as much as possible. This is a directorial approach that is different from a creative collaborative relationship between director and actor that is built on a mutual responsiveness, and where indeterminacy and improvisation are tools used only in the rehearsal process and not part of the performance. A description of such a collaborative exchange between actor and director is offered by Laura Cull, again in connection to the practice of Goat Island: “Mutually responsive, there is no clear separation between directive as the creator or as the condition of the creativity of the response; the response creates the directive as much as the other way around, such that no traditional hierarchy of value might emerge to privilege the role of the director over that of the performer” (Cull 2012, 44). Consequently, this is true but also not true in the context of the creative situations we are talking about. The circumstances did not admit a directorial involvement in judging the value of the expression, like suggesting that one expressive quality was better than another. So far, the example by Cull relates to the situation of our performances, but looking more closely at what might be called a reciprocal directorial approach, an exchange where the performer’s “response creates the directive as much as the other way around,” I think the correlation dissolves. Such an exchange, where a suggestion from the performer is reacted on and developed through a directorial response, thus allowed to influence the expression of the performer, could not be used either in the chance operated sections of *John and the Mushrooms* or in the other two performances.  Instead I met the directorial demand by asking questions. These questions were mainly aimed to increase awareness of the present moment, and as encouragement to expand their imagination, but also to instigate discussions and reflections among the performers. To a certain extent this directorial approach connects to Cage when he talks about his compositional practice: “Instead of representing my control, they represent questions that I have asked and the answers that I have been given by means of chance operations. I have merely changed my responsibility from making choices to asking questions. It’s not easy to ask questions” (Kostelanetz 1987, 214).

These notes on the directorial approach connote, to a certain degree, that it was possible to apply a quite sharp conceptual attitude towards the task of directing the performances. That is of course not entirely true.<sup>168</sup> My desire to remove myself from the authoritarian role and from making decisions that I instead wanted the construction of the concepts to steer, continuously transmitted tension into the collective process that demanded that I, at certain points, took on the role of director in a more conventional sense. Those situations, when this demand was most clear, were often related to the need to affirm that the creative process of the actor/musician was vital, and to infuse courage to continue. Even if that aspect of the directorial work certainly should not be seen as disconnected from the creative process, it represents discussions and methodologies that are less relevant for this discourse, and to expand the reasoning into that area would be somewhat of a deviation from problematizing immanent creation. Instead I want to try to summarize what has already been said.

# Reconnecting to the fields of tension

Who is the creator? Who needs to know, and why? The criticism of a search for the creator, of the stubborn desire to find one transcendent force, lies in the midst of the Deleuzian, Deleuzian/Guattarian philosophical explorations. Such a search stymies the understanding of multiplicity and shields us from sensing that each element “ceaselessly varies and alters its distance and relation to the others” (Deleuze and Guattari 2004, 34). Embracing multiplicity is then what offers the possibility to “escape the abstract opposition between the multiple and the one, to escape dialectics, to succeed in conceiving the multiple in the pure state, to cease treating it as a numerical fragment of a lost Unity or Totality or as the organic element of a Unity or Totality yet to come, and instead distinguish between different types of multiplicity” (Deleuze and Guattari 2004, 36). The process towards an understanding of this notion is endless and it might be so that the experience of an insight only comes in glimpses at those points when an image of a fractured self is accessible. The esthetics of the performances harbor the idea that the creative situation generates the possibility for such a glimpse. However, the aim in the above reasoning has been less about finding out whether those glimpses occurred, and more about investigating the frictions, problems, contradictions and challenges that come with instigating and directing an immanent creative process. As we have seen, this process is quite complicated to untangle and my tactic has been to look at how the immanent creative situation relates to and affects a few delineated – but interrelated – aspects: the creative energy of the performer; the forming of performative relations; creative/ compositional responsibility; the question and sense of participation; the role of the director and the problem of hierarchy. If we remove the borders between these aspects and look at what they have in common, and what it is that constitutes a general (and problematic) condition, we will see that it is an unpredictable process and in continuous variation. This condition of unpredictability is what generates the problems the performers experience, that have to be dealt with in an instant and performative way. And, it is within this condition that we can locate some of those *fields of tension* that I outlined in my introduction and stipulated as crucial for my critical exploration. As I pointed out, I see these fields of tension mainly as a methodological construction (they only fully hold together on a critical-conceptual level), but when honing in on the specifics of the performative situation, as I have done in the above, they become sharper and their corporeal aspect takes shape.

Fields of tension emerge between compounds of energies (diverse intensions and desires) which I defined as: The energies of the performer(s); the force of the material; the perceptive dynamic of the full event; the injection of my own personal energy, esthetic intent and conviction; the choices and the activation of critical discourses. What I have been trying to locate and critically activate in the above reasoning are those fields of tension emerging between the energies of the performers, the specifics of the conceptual setup (material) and the directorial approach (esthetic intent and conviction).  The performer is instructed to invent at the same time as the concept/instructions imply restrictions; the performer searches for collaboration and connections at the same time as the concept asserts that the performer should stay within his/her own expressive trajectory; the concept of the performances radiates a strong compositional responsibility at the same time as it demands the performer to take responsibility for the compositional aspect of his/her creative invention; the concept of the performances purport a non-hierarchical outlook (multiplicity) but the performer senses a continuous struggle to locate and establish relations and the presence of the director is not one of non-presence and therefore infuses uncertainty. Formulated like this the performative challenges might seem insurmountable, but we know they are not. They are the dissolvent that opens up the expression for diverse possibilities.

What is there to gain from taking apart and assigning specific descriptive concepts to movements and occurrences happening on a micro level in the exchange between the performers in an immanent collective creation? What is there to find out, and for what reason? Well, initially the idea of illuminating the specifics of how a collective expression grows from within and how all the different expressive choices made by the individuals in an immanent indeterminate creative process are generated, should be seen as an attempt to capture the inner workings of the constituent parts of composition and compositional thinking. But beyond that lies an assumption that the qualities and the particular demands inherent in a process of this nature generate a specific ambience that in a significant way effects the transference between the performance and its audience. This ambience is produced by the performative condition of unpredictability and continuous variation and is *prolonged into the experience of the expression as a whole*; new-borne transformations happening in front of an audience. This esthetic-perceptive extension of the immanent creative situation, into processes happening outside the ensemble, will be explored in the chapter *Meeting – Meaning*, which takes off from the question: Can the concept of an immanent creative process be transferred to a sequence of perception in the audience?
